## Author
[[Friedrich Nietzsche]]
## Genres
#Philosophy 
#Psychology 
# Contents
## Preface
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
So	far	it	is	on	Good	and	Evil	that	we	have meditated	least	profoundly:	this	was	always	too dangerous	a	subject.	Conscience,	a	good	reputation,	hell,	and	at	times	even	the	police, have	not	allowed	and	do	not	allow	of	impartiality;	in	the	presence	of	morality,	as	before	all authority,	we	 must	not	even	think,	much	less	speak:	here	we	must	obey!<br>
...<br>
how	shall	we	call	that which	takes	place	in	it—in	 us?	for	our	taste	inclines	to	the	employment	of	more	modest phrases.	But	there	is	no	doubt	that	to	us	likewise	there	speaketh	a	“thou	shalt”;	we likewise	obey	a	strict	law	which	is	set	above	us—and	this	is	the	last	cry	of	morals	which	is still	audible	to	us,	which	we	too	must	 live:	here,	if	anywhere,	are	we	still	 men	of conscience,	because,	to	put	the	matter	in	plain	words,	we	will	not	return	to	that	which	we look	upon	as	decayed,	outlived,	and	superseded,	we	will	not	return	to	something “unworthy	of	belief,”	whether	it	be	called	God,	virtue,	truth,	justice,	love	of	one’s neighbour,	or	what	not;	we	will	not	permit	ourselves	to	open	up	a	lying	path	to	old	ideals; we	are	thoroughly	and	unalterably	opposed	to	anything	that	would	intercede	and	mingle with	us;	opposed	to	all	forms	of	present–day	faith	and	Christianity;	opposed	to	the lukewarmness	of	all	romanticism	and	fatherlandism;	opposed	also	to	the	artistic	sense	of enjoyment	and	lack	of	principle	which	would	fain	make	us	worship	where	we	no	longer believe—for	we	are	artists—opposed,	in	short,	to	all	this	European	feminism	(or	idealism, if	this	term	be	thought	preferable)	which	everlastingly	“draws	upward,”	and	which	in consequence	everlastingly	“lowers”	and	“degrades.”	Yet,	being	men	of	 this	conscience,	we feel	that	we	are	related	to	that	German	uprightness	and	piety	which	dates	back	thousands of	years,	although	we	immoralists	and	atheists	may	be	the	late	and	uncertain	offspring	of these	virtues—yea,	we	even	consider	ourselves,	in	a	certain	respect,	as	their	heirs,	the executors	of	their	inmost	will:	a	pessimistic	will,	as	I	have	already	pointed	out,	which	is not	afraid	to	deny	itself,	because	it	denies	itself	with	 joy!	In	us	is	consummated,	if	you desire	a	formula— the	autosuppression	of	morals.
</i></p>
## Book I
### Aphorism 09: *CONCEPTION OF THE MORALITY OF CUSTOM*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
In	comparison	with	the	mode	of life	which	prevailed	among	men	for	thousands	of	years,	we	men	of	the	present	day	are living	in	a	very	immoral	age:	the	power	of	custom	has	been	weakened	to	a	remarkable degree,	and	the	sense	of	morality	is	so	refined	and	elevated	that	we	might	almost	describe it	as	volatilised.	That	is	why	we	late	comers	experience	such	difficulty	in	obtaining	a fundamental	conception	of	the	origin	of	morality:	and	even	if	we	do	obtain	it,	our	words	of explanation	stick	in	our	throats,	so	coarse	would	they	sound	if	we	uttered	them!	or	to	so great	an	extent	would	they	seem	to	be	a	slander	upon	morality!	Thus,	for	example,	the fundamental	clause:	morality	is	nothing	else	(and,	above	all,	nothing	more)	than	obedience to	customs,	of	whatsoever	nature	they	may	be.	But	customs	are	simply	the	traditional	way of	acting	and	valuing.	Where	there	is	no	tradition	there	is	no	morality;	and	the	less	life	is governed	by	tradition,	the	narrower	the	circle	of	morality.	The	free	man	is	immoral, because	it	is	his	 will	to	depend	upon	himself	and	not	upon	tradition:	in	all	the	primitive states	of	humanity	“evil”	is	equivalent	to	“individual,”	“free,”	“arbitrary,” “unaccustomed,”	“unforeseen,”	“incalculable.”	In	such	primitive	conditions,	always measured	by	this	standard,	any	action	performed— not	because	tradition	commands	it,	but for	other	reasons	( e.g. 	on	account	of	its	individual	utility),	even	for	the	same	reasons	as had	been	formerly	established	by	custom—is	termed	immoral,	and	is	felt	to	be	so	even	by the	very	man	who	performs	it,	for	it	has	not	been	done	out	of	obedience	to	the	tradition. <br>
<br>
What	is	tradition?	A	higher	authority,	which	is	obeyed,	not	because	it	commands	what	is useful	to	us,	but	merely	because	it	commands.	And	in	what	way	can	this	feeling	for tradition	be	distinguished	from	a	general	feeling	of	fear?	It	is	the	fear	of	a	higher intelligence	which	commands,	the	fear	of	an	incomprehensible	power,	of	something	that	is more	than	personal—there	is	 superstition	in	this	fear.	In	primitive	times	the	domain	of morality	included	education	and	hygienics,	marriage,	medicine,	agriculture,	war,	speech and	silence,	the	relationship	between	man	and	man,	and	between	man	and	the	gods— morality	required	that	a	man	should	observe	her	prescriptions	without	thinking	of	 himself as	individual.	Everything,	therefore,	was	originally	custom,	and	whoever	wished	to	raise himself	above	it,	had	first	of	all	to	make	himself	a	kind	of	lawgiver	and	medicine–man,	a sort	of	demi–god—in	other	words,	he	had	to	create	customs,	a	dangerous	and	fearful	thing to	do!—Who	is	the	most	moral	man?	On	the	one	hand,	he	who	most	frequently	obeys	the
law:	 e.g. 	he	who,	like	the	Brahmins,	carries	a	consciousness	of	the	law	about	with	him wherever	he	may	go,	and	introduces	it	into	the	smallest	divisions	of	time,	continually exercising	his	mind	in	finding	opportunities	for	obeying	the	law.	On	the	other	hand,	he who	obeys	the	law	in	the	most	difficult	cases.	The	most	moral	man	is	he	who	makes	the greatest	 sacrifices	to	morality;	but	what	are	the	greatest	sacrifices?	In	answering	this question	several	different	kinds	of	morality	will	be	developed:	but	the	distinction	between the	morality	of	the	 most	frequent	obedience	and	the	morality	of	the	 most	difficult obedience	is	of	the	greatest	importance.	Let	us	not	be	deceived	as	to	the	motives	of	that moral	law	which	requires,	as	an	indication	of	morality,	obedience	to	custom	in	the	most difficult	cases!	Self–conquest	is	required,	not	by	reason	of	its	useful	consequences	for	the individual;	but	that	custom	and	tradition	may	appear	to	be	dominant,	in	spite	of	all individual	counter	desires	and	advantages.	The	individual	shall	sacrifice	himself—so demands	the	morality	of	custom. <br>
<br>
On	the	other	hand,	those	moralists	who,	like	the	followers	of	Socrates,	recommend	self– control	and	sobriety	to	the	 individual	as	his	greatest	possible	advantage	and	the	key	to	his greatest	personal	happiness,	are	 exceptions—and	if	we	ourselves	do	not	think	so,	this	is simply	due	to	our	having	been	brought	up	under	their	influence.	They	all	take	a	new	path, and	thereby	bring	down	upon	themselves	the	utmost	disapproval	of	all	the	representatives of	the	morality	of	custom.	They	sever	their	connection	with	the	community,	as immoralists,	and	are,	in	the	fullest	sense	of	the	word,	evil	ones.	In	the	same	way,	every Christian	who	“sought,	above	all	things,	his	 own	salvation,”	must	have	seemed	evil	to	a virtuous	Roman	of	the	old	school.	Wherever	a	community	exists,	and	consequently	also	a morality	of	custom,	the	feeling	prevails	that	any	punishment	for	the	violation	of	a	custom is	inflicted,	above	all,	on	the	community:	this	punishment	is	a	supernatural	punishment, the	manifestations	and	limits	of	which	are	so	difficult	to	understand,	and	are	investigated with	such	superstitious	fear.	The	community	can	compel	any	one	member	of	it	to	make good,	either	to	an	individual	or	to	the	community	itself,	any	ill	consequences	which	may have	followed	upon	such	a	member’s	action.	It	can	also	call	down	a	sort	of	vengeance upon	the	head	of	the	individual	by	endeavouring	to	show	that,	as	the	result	of	his	action,	a storm	of	divine	anger	has	burst	over	the	community,—but,	above	all,	it	regards	the	guilt	of the	individual	more	particularly	as	 its	own	guilt,	and	bears	the	punishment	of	the	isolated individual	as	its	own	punishment—“Morals,”	they	bewail	in	their	innermost	heart,	“morals have	grown	lax,	if	such	deeds	as	these	are	possible.”	And	every	individual	action,	every individual	mode	of	thinking,	causes	dread.	It	is	impossible	to	determine	how	much	the more	select,	rare,	and	original	minds	must	have	suffered	in	the	course	of	time	by	being considered	as	evil	and	dangerous,  yea,	because	they	even	looked	upon	themselves	as	such. <br>
<br>
Under	the	dominating	influence	of	the	morality	of	custom,	originality	of	every	kind	came to	acquire	a	bad	conscience;	and	even	now	the	sky	of	the	best	minds	seems	to	be	more overcast	by	this	thought	than	it	need	be.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 10: *COUNTER-MOTION BETWEEN THE SENSE OF MORALITY AND THE SENSE OF CAUSALITY*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
As	the	sense	of	causality	increases,	so	does	the	extent	of	the	domain	of morality	decrease:	for	every	time	one	has	been	able	to	grasp	the	necessary	effects,	and	to conceive	them	as	distinct	from	all	incidentals	and	chance	possibilities	( post	hoc),	one	has, at	the	same	time,	destroyed	an	enormous	number	of	 imaginary	causalities,	which	had hitherto	been	believed	in	as	the	basis	of	morals—the	real	world	is	much	smaller	than	the world	of	our	imagination—and	each	time	also	one	casts	away	a	certain	amount	of	one’s anxiousness	and	coercion,	and	some	of	our	reverence	for	the	authority	of	custom	is	lost: morality	in	general	undergoes	a	diminution.	He	who,	on	the	other	hand,	wishes	to	increase it	must	know	how	to	prevent	results	from	becoming	controllable.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 14: *THE SIGNIFICATION OF MADNESS IN THE HISTORY OF MORALITY*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
THE	SIGNIFICATION	OF	MADNESS	IN	THE	HISTORY	OF	MORALITY.—If,	despite that	formidable	pressure	of	the	“morality	of	custom,”	under	which	all	human	communities lived—thousands	of	years	before	our	own	era,	and	during	our	own	era	up	to	the	present day	(we	ourselves	are	dwelling	in	the	small	world	of	exceptions,	and,	as	it	were,	in	an	evil zone):—if,	I	say,	in	spite	of	all	this,	new	and	divergent	ideas,	valuations,	and	impulses have	made	their	appearance	time	after	time,	this	state	of	things	has	been	brought	about only	with	the	assistance	of	a	dreadful	associate:	it	was	insanity	almost	everywhere	that paved	the	way	for	the	new	thought	and	cast	off	the	spell	of	an	old	custom	and	superstition. <br>
<br>
Do	ye	understand	why	this	had	to	be	done	through	insanity?	by	something	which	is	in both	voice	and	appearance	as	horrifying	and	incalculable	as	the	demoniac	whims	of	wind and	sea,	and	consequently	calling	for	like	dread	and	respect?	by	something	bearing	upon	it the	signs	of	entire	lack	of	consciousness	as	clearly	as	the	convulsions	and	foam	of	the epileptic,	which	appeared	to	typify	the	insane	person	as	the	mask	and	speaking–trumpet	of some	divine	being?	by	something	that	inspired	even	the	bearer	of	the	new	thought	with awe	and	fear	of	himself,	and	that,	suppressing	all	remorse,	drove	him	on	to	become	its prophet	and	martyr?—Well,	in	our	own	time,	we	continually	hear	the	statement	reiterated that	genius	is	tinctured	with	madness	instead	of	good	sense.	Men	of	earlier	ages	were	far more	inclined	to	believe	that,	wherever	traces	of	insanity	showed	themselves,	a	certain proportion	of	genius	and	wisdom	was	likewise	present—something	“divine,”	as	they whispered	to	one	another.	More	than	this,	they	expressed	their	opinions	on	the	point	with sufficient	emphasis.	“All	the	greatest	benefits	of	Greece	have	sprung	from	madness,”	said Plato,	setting	on	record	the	opinion	of	the	entire	ancient	world.	Let	us	take	a	step	further: all	those	superior	men,	who	felt	themselves	irresistibly	urged	on	to	throw	off	the	yoke	of some	morality	or	other,	had	no	other	resource— if	they	were	not	really	mad—than	to	feign madness,	or	actually	to	become	insane.	And	this	holds	good	for	innovators	in	every department	of	life,	and	not	only	in	religion	and	politics.	Even	the	reformer	of	the	poetic metre	was	forced	to	justify	himself	by	means	of	madness.	(Thus	even	down	to	gentler	ages madness	remained	a	kind	of	convention	in	poets,	of	which	Solon,	for	instance,	took advantage	when	urging	the	Athenians	to	reconquer	Salamis.)—“How	can	one	make	one’s self	mad	when	one	is	not	mad	and	dare	not	feign	to	be	so?”	Almost	all	the	eminent	men	of antiquity	have	given	themselves	up	to	this	dreadful	mode	of	reasoning:	a	secret	doctrine	of artifices	and	dietetic	jugglery	grew	up	around	this	subject	and	was	handed	down	from generation	to	generation,	together	with	the	feeling	of	the	innocence,	even	sanctity,	of	such plans	and	meditations.	The	means	of	becoming	a	medicine–man	among	the	Indians,	a saint	among	Christians	of	the	Middle	Ages,	an	angecok	among	Greenlanders,	a	Pagee among	Brazilians,	are	the	same	in	essence:	senseless	fasting,	continual	abstention	from sexual	intercourse,	isolation	in	a	wilderness,	ascending	a	mountain	or	a	pillar,	“sitting	on an	aged	willow	that	looks	out	upon	a	lake,”	and	thinking	of	absolutely	nothing	but	what may	give	rise	to	ecstasy	or	mental	derangements. <br>
<br>
Who	would	dare	to	glance	at	the	desert	of	the	bitterest	and	most	superfluous	agonies	of spirit,	in	which	probably	the	most	productive	men	of	all	ages	have	pined	away?	Who could	listen	to	the	sighs	of	those	lonely	and	troubled	minds:	“O	ye	heavenly	powers,	grant me	madness!	Madness,	that	I	at	length	may	believe	in	myself!	Vouchsafe	delirium	and convulsions,	sudden	flashes	of	light	and	periods	of	darkness;	frighten	me	with	such shivering	and	feverishness	as	no	mortal	ever	experienced	before,	with	clanging	noises	and haunting	spectres;	let	me	growl	and	whine	and	creep	about	like	a	beast,	if	only	I	can	come to	believe	in	myself!	I	am	devoured	by	doubt.	I	have	slain	the	law,	and	I	now	dread	the law	as	a	living	person	dreads	a	corpse.	If	I	am	not	 above	the	law,	I	am	the	most	abandoned of	wretches.	Whence	cometh	this	new	spirit	that	dwelleth	within	me	but	from	you?	Prove to	me,	then,	that	I	am	one	of	you—nothing	but	madness	will	prove	it	to	me.”	And	only	too often	does	such	a	fervour	attain	its	object:	at	the	very	time	when	Christianity	was	giving the	greatest	proof	of	its	fertility	in	the	production	of	saints	and	martyrs,	believing	that	it was	thus	proving	itself,	Jerusalem	contained	large	lunatic	asylums	for	shipwrecked	saints, for	those	whose	last	spark	of	good	sense	had	been	quenched	by	the	floods	of	insanity.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 18: *THE MORALITY OF VOLUNTARY SUFFERING*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
What	is	the	highest	enjoyment	for men	living	in	a	state	of	war	in	a	small	community,	the	existence	of	which	is	continually threatened,	and	the	morality	of	which	is	the	strictest	possible?  i.e. 	for	souls	which	are vigorous,	vindictive,	malicious,	full	of	suspicion,	ready	to	face	the	direst	events,	hardened by	privation	and	morality?	The	enjoyment	of	cruelty:	just	as,	in	such	souls	and	in	such circumstances,	it	would	be	regarded	as	a	virtue	to	be	ingenious	and	insatiable	in	cruelty. <br>
<br>
Such	a	community	would	find	its	delight	in	performing	cruel	deeds,	casting	aside,	for once,	the	gloom	of	constant	anxiety	and	precaution.	Cruelty	is	one	of	the	most	ancient enjoyments	at	their	festivities.	As	a	consequence	it	is	believed	that	the	gods	likewise	are pleased	by	the	sight	of	cruelty	and	rejoice	at	it—and	in	this	way	the	belief	is	spread	that voluntary	suffering,	self–chosen	martyrdom,	has	a	high	signification	and	value	of	its	own. <br>
<br>
In	the	community	custom	gradually	brings	about	a	practice	in	conformity	with	this	belief: henceforward	people	become	more	suspicious	of	all	exuberant	well–being,	and	more confident	as	they	find	themselves	in	a	state	of	great	pain;	they	think	that	the	gods	may	be unfavourable	to	them	on	account	of	happiness,	and	favourable	on	account	of	pain—not compassionate!	For	compassion	is	looked	upon	with	contempt,	and	unworthy	of	a	strong and	awe–inspiring	soul—but	agreeable	to	them,	because	the	sight	of	human	suffering	put these	gods	into	good	humour	and	makes	them	feel	powerful,	and	a	cruel	mind	revels	in	the sensation	of	power.	It	was	thus	that	the	“most	moral	man”	of	the	community	was considered	as	such	by	virtue	of	his	frequent	suffering,	privation,	laborious	existence,	and cruel	mortification—not,	to	repeat	it	again	and	again,	as	a	means	of	discipline	or	self–control	or	a	desire	for	individual	happiness—but	a	a	virtue	which	renders	the	evil	gods well–disposed	towards	the	community,	a	virtue	which	continually	wafts	up	to	them	the odour	of	an	expiatory	sacrifice.	All	those	intellectual	leaders	of	the	nations	who	reached the	point	of	being	able	to	stir	up	the	sluggish	though	prolific	mire	of	their	customs	had	to possess	this	factor	of	voluntary	martyrdom	as	well	as	insanity	in	order	to	obtain	belief— especially,	and	above	all,	as	is	always	the	case,	belief	in	themselves!	The	more	their	minds followed	new	paths,	and	were	consequently	tormented	by	pricks	of	conscience,	the	more cruelly	they	battled	against	their	own	flesh,	their	own	desires,	and	their	own	health—as	if they	were	offering	the	gods	a	compensation	in	pleasure,	lest	these	gods	should	wax	wroth at	the	neglect	of	ancient	customs	and	the	setting	up	of	new	aims. <br>
<br>
Let	no	one	be	too	hasty	in	thinking	that	we	have	now	entirely	freed	ourselves	from	such	a logic	of	feeling!	Let	the	most	heroic	souls	among	us	question	themselves	on	this	very point.	The	least	step	forward	in	the	domain	of	free	thought	and	individual	life	has	been achieved	in	all	ages	to	the	accompaniment	of	physical	and	intellectual	tortures:	and	not only	the	mere	step	forward,	no!	but	every	form	of	movement	and	change	has	rendered necessary	innumerable	martyrs,	throughout	the	entire	course	of	thousands	of	years	which sought	their	paths	and	laid	down	their	foundation–stones,	years,	however,	which	we	do	not think	of	when	we	speak	about	“world–history,”	that	ridiculously	small	division	of mankind’s	existence.	And	even	in	this	so–called	world–history,	which	in	the	main	is merely	a	great	deal	of	noise	about	the	latest	novelties,	there	is	no	more	important	theme than	the	old,	old	tragedy	of	the	martyrs	 who	tried	to	move	the	mire.	Nothing	has	been more	dearly	bought	than	the	minute	portion	of	human	reason	and	feeling	of	liberty	upon which	we	now	pride	ourselves.	But	it	is	this	very	pride	which	makes	it	almost	impossible for	us	to–day	to	be	conscious	of	that	enormous	lapse	of	time,	preceding	the	period	of
“world–history”	when	“morality	of	custom”	held	the	field,	and	to	consider	this	lapse	of time	as	 the	real	and	decisive	epoch	that	established	the	character	of	mankind:	an	epoch when	suffering	was	considered	as	a	virtue,	cruelty	as	a	virtue,	hypocrisy	as	a	virtue, revenge	as	a	virtue,	and	the	denial	of	the	reason	as	a	virtue,	whereas,	on	the	other	hand, well–being	was	regarded	as	a	danger,	longing	for	knowledge	as	a	danger,	peace	as	a danger,	compassion	as	a	danger:	an	epoch	when	being	pitied	was	looked	upon	as	an	insult, work	as	an	insult,	madness	as	a	divine	attribute,	and	every	kind	of	change	as	immoral	and pregnant	with	ruin!	You	imagine	that	all	this	has	changed,	and	that	humanity	must likewise	have	changed	its	character?	Oh,	ye	poor	psychologists,	learn	to	know	yourselves better!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 20: *FREE–DOERS	AND FREE–THINKERS*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Compared	with	free–thinkers,	free–doers	are at	a	disadvantage,	because	it	is	evident	that	men	suffer	more	from	the	consequences	of actions	than	of	thoughts.	If	we	remember,	however,	that	both	seek	their	own	satisfaction, and	that	free–thinkers	have	already	found	their	satisfaction	in	reflection	upon	and utterance	of	forbidden	things,	there	is	no	difference	in	the	motives;	but	in	respect	of	the consequences	the	issue	will	be	decided	against	the	free–thinker,	provided	that	it	be	not judged	from	the	most	superficial	and	vulgar	external	appearance,  i.e. 	not	as	every	one would	judge	it.	We	must	make	up	for	a	good	deal	of	the	calumny	with	which	men	have covered	all	those	who	have,	by	their	actions,	broken	away	from	the	authority	of	some custom—they	are	generally	called	criminals.	Every	one	who	has	hitherto	overthrown	a law	of	established	morality	has	always	at	first	been	considered	as	a	 wicked	man:	but	when it	was	afterwards	found	impossible	to	re–establish	the	law,	and	people	gradually	became accustomed	to	the	change,	the	epithet	was	changed	by	slow	degrees.	History	deals	almost exclusively	with	these	 wicked	men,	who	later	on	came	to	be	recognised	as	 good	men.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 33: *THE CONTEMPT OF CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES, AND REALITY*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Those unfortunate	occurrences	which	take	place	at	times	in	the	community,	such	as	sudden storms,	bad	harvests,	or	plagues,	lead	members	of	the	community	to	suspect	that	offences against	custom	have	been	committed,	or	that	new	customs	must	be	invented	to	appease	a new	demoniac	power	and	caprice.	Suspicion	and	reasoning	of	this	kind,	however,	evade an	inquiry	into	the	real	and	natural	causes,	and	take	the	demoniac	cause	for	granted.	This is	one	source	of	the	hereditary	perversion	of	the	human	intellect;	and	the	other	one	follows in	its	train,	for,	proceeding	on	the	same	principle,	people	paid	much	less	attention	to	the real	and	natural	consequences	of	an	action	than	to	the	supernatural	consequences	(the	so–called	punishments	and	mercies	of	the	Divinity).	It	is	commanded,	for	instance,	that certain	baths	are	to	be	taken	at	certain	times:	and	the	baths	are	taken,	not	for	the	sake	of cleanliness,	but	because	the	command	has	been	made.	We	are	not	taught	to	avoid	the	real consequences	of	dirt,	but	merely	the	supposed	displeasure	of	the	gods	because	a	bath	has been	omitted.	Under	the	pressure	of	superstitious	fear,	people	began	to	suspect	that	these ablutions	were	of	much	greater	importance	than	they	seemed;	they	ascribed	inner	and supplementary	meanings	to	them,	gradually	lost	their	sense	of	and	pleasure	in	reality,	and finally	reality	is	considered	as	valuable	 only	to	the	extent	that	it	is	a	symbol. 	Hence	a	man who	is	under	the	influence	of	the	morality	of	custom	comes	to	despise	causes	first	of	all, secondly	consequences,	and	thirdly	reality,	and	weaves	all	his	higher	feelings	(reverence, sublimity,	pride,	gratitude,	love)	 into	an	imaginary	world:	the	so–called	higher	world.	And even	to–day	we	can	see	the	consequences	of	this:	wherever,	and	in	whatever	fashion, man’s	feelings	are	raised,	that	imaginary	world	is	in	evidence.	It	is	sad	to	have	to	say	it; but	for	the	time	being	 all	higher	sentiments	must	be	looked	upon	with	suspicion	by	the man	of	science,	to	so	great	an	extent	are	they	intermingled	with	illusion	and	extravagance.<br>
<br>
Not	that	they	need	necessarily	be	suspected	 per	se	and	for	ever;	but	there	is	no	doubt	that, of	all	the	gradual	 purifications	which	await	humanity,	the	purification	of	the	higher feelings	will	be	one	of	the	slowest.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 34: *MORAL FEELINGS	AND CONCEPTIONS*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
It	is	clear	that	moral	feelings	are transmitted	in	such	a	way	that	children	perceive	in	adults	violent	predilections	and aversions	for	certain	actions,	and	then,	like	born	apes,	imitate	such	likes	and	dislikes.  Later	on	in	life,	when	they	are	thoroughly	permeated	by	these	acquired	and	well–practised feelings,	they	think	it	a	matter	of	propriety	and	decorum	to	provide	a	kind	of	justification for	these	predilections	and	aversions.	These	“justifications,”	however,	are	in	no	way connected	with	the	origin	or	the	degree	of	the	feeling:	people	simply	accommodate themselves	to	the	rule	that,	as	rational	beings,	they	must	give	reasons	for	their	pros	and cons,	reasons	which	must	be	assignable	and	acceptable	into	the	bargain.	Up	to	this	extent the	history	of	the	moral	feelings	is	entirely	different	from	the	history	of	moral	conceptions. <br>
<br>
The	first–mentioned	are	powerful	 before	the	action,	and	the	latter	especially	after	it,	in view	of	the	necessity	for	making	one’s	self	clear	in	regard	to	them.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 38: *IMPULSES TRANSFORMED BY MORAL JUDGMENTS*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The	same	impulse,	under the	impression	of	the	blame	cast	upon	it	by	custom,	develops	into	the	painful	feeling	of cowardice,	or	else	the	pleasurable	feeling	of	 humility,	in	case	a	morality,	like	that	of Christianity,	has	taken	it	to	its	heart	and	called	it	 good.	In	other	words,	this	instinct	will fall	under	the	influence	of	either	a	good	conscience	or	a	bad	one!	In	itself,  like	every instinct,	it	does	not	possess	either	this	or	indeed	any	other	moral	character	and	name,	or even	a	definite	accompanying	feeling	of	pleasure	or	displeasure;	it	does	not	acquire	all these	qualities	as	its	second	nature	until	it	comes	into	contact	with	impulses	which	have already	been	baptized	as	good	and	evil,	or	has	been	recognised	as	the	attribute	of	beings already	weighed	and	valued	by	the	people	from	a	moral	point	of	view.	Thus	the	ancient conception	of	envy	differed	entirely	from	ours.	Hesiod	reckons	it	among	the	qualities	of the	 good,	benevolent	Eris,	and	it	was	not	considered	as	offensive	to	attribute	some	kind	of envy	even	to	the	gods.	This	is	easy	to	understand	in	a	state	of	things	inspired	mainly	by emulation,	but	emulation	was	looked	upon	as	good,	and	valued	accordingly. <br>
<br>
The	Greeks	were	likewise	different	from	us	in	the	value	they	set	upon	hope:	they conceived	it	as	blind	and	deceitful.	Hesiod	in	one	of	his	poems	has	made	a	strong reference	to	it—a	reference	so	strong,	indeed,	that	no	modern	commentator	has	quite understood	it;	for	it	runs	contrary	to	the	modern	mind,	which	has	learnt	from	Christianity to	look	upon	hope	as	a	virtue.	Among	the	Greeks,	on	the	other	hand,	the	portal	leading	to	a knowledge	of	the	future	seemed	only	partly	closed,	and,	in	innumerable	instances,	it	was impressed	upon	them	as	a	religious	obligation	to	inquire	into	the	future,	in	those	cases where	we	remain	satisfied	with	hope.	It	thus	came	about	that	the	Greeks,	thanks	to	their oracles	and	seers,	held	hope	in	small	esteem,	and	even	lowered	it	to	the	level	of	an	evil and	a	danger. <br>
<br>
The	Jews,	again,	took	a	different	view	of	anger	from	that	held	by	us,	and	sanctified	it: hence	they	have	placed	the	sombre	majesty	of	the	wrathful	man	at	an	elevation	so	high that	a	European	cannot	conceive	it.	They	moulded	their	wrathful	and	holy	Jehovah	after the	images	of	their	wrathful	and	holy	prophets.	Compared	with	them,	all	the	Europeans who	have	exhibited	the	greatest	wrath	are,	so	to	speak,	only	second–hand	creatures.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 43: *HOW MANY FORCES MUST NOW BE UNITED	IN A	THINKER*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
To	rise	superior	to considerations	of	the	senses,	to	raise	one’s	self	to	abstract	contemplations:	this	is	what	was formerly	regarded	as	 elevation;	but	now	it	is	not	practicable	for	us	to	share	the	same feelings.	Luxuriating	in	the	most	shadowy	images	of	words	and	things;	playing	with	those invisible,	inaudible,	imperceptible	beings,	was	considered	as	existence	in	another	and higher	world,	a	world	that	sprang	from	the	deep	contempt	felt	for	the	world	which	was perceptible	to	the	senses,	this	seductive	and	wicked	world	of	ours.	“These	 abstracta	no longer	mislead	us,	but	they	may	lead	us”—with	such	words	men	soared	aloft.	It	was	not the	 substance	of	these	intellectual	sports,	but	the	sports	themselves,	which	was	looked upon	as	“the	higher	thing”	in	the	primeval	ages	of	science.	Hence	we	have	Plato’s admiration	for	dialectics,	and	his	enthusiastic	belief	in	the	necessary	relationship	of dialectics	to	the	good	man	who	has	risen	superior	to	the	considerations	of	his	senses.	It was	not	only	knowledge	that	was	discovered	little	by	little,	but	also	the	different	means	of acquiring	it,	the	conditions	and	operations	which	precede	knowledge	in	man.	And	it always	seemed	as	if	the	newly–discovered	operation	or	the	newly–experienced	condition were	not	a	means	of	acquiring	knowledge,	but	was	even	the	substance,	goal,	and	sum–total	of	everything	that	was	worth	knowing.	What	does	the	thinker	require?—imagination, inspiration,	abstraction,	spirituality,	invention,	presentiment,	induction,	dialectics, deduction,	criticism,	ability	to	collect	materials,	an	impersonal	mode	of	thinking, contemplation,	comprehensiveness,	and	lastly,	but	not	least,	justice,	and	love	for everything	that	exists—but	each	one	of	these	means	was	at	one	time	considered,	in	the history	of	the	 vita	contemplativa,	as	a	goal	and	final	purpose,	and	they	all	secured	for	their inventors	that	perfect	happiness	which	fills	the	human	soul	when	its	final	purpose	dawns upon	it.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 49: *THE NEW FUNDAMENTAL FEELING: OUR FINAL	CORRUPTIBILITY*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
In	former times	people	sought	to	show	the	feeling	of	man’s	greatness	by	pointing	to	his	divine descent.	This,	however,	has	now	become	a	forbidden	path,	for	the	ape	stands	at	its entrance,	and	likewise	other	fearsome	animals,	showing	their	teeth	in	a	knowing	fashion, as	if	to	say,	No	further	this	way!	Hence	people	now	try	the	opposite	direction:	the	road along	which	humanity	is	proceeding	shall	stand	as	an	indication	of	their	greatness	and their	relationship	to	God.	But	alas!	this,	too,	is	useless!	At	the	far	end	of	this	path	stands the	funeral	urn	of	the	last	man	and	grave–digger	(with	the	inscription,  Nihil	humani	a	me alienum	puto).	To	whatever	height	mankind	may	have	developed—and	perhaps	in	the	end it	will	not	be	so	high	as	when	they	began!—there	is	as	little	prospect	of	their	attaining	to	a higher	order	as	there	is	for	the	ant	and	the	earwig	to	enter	into	kinship	with	God	and eternity	at	the	end	of	their	career	on	earth.	What	is	to	come	will	drag	behind	it	that	which has	passed:	why	should	any	little	star,	or	even	any	little	species	on	that	star,	form	an exception	to	that	eternal	drama?	Away	with	such	sentimentalities!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 60: *ALL SPIRIT FINALLY BECOMES VISIBLE*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Christianity	has	assimilated	the	entire spirituality	of	an	incalculable	number	of	men	who	were	by	nature	submissive,	all	those enthusiasts	of	humiliation	and	reverence,	both	refined	and	coarse.	It	has	in	this	way	freed itself	from	its	own	original	rustic	coarseness—of	which	we	are	vividly	reminded	when	we look	at	the	oldest	image	of	St.	Peter	the	Apostle—and	has	become	a	very	intellectual religion,	with	thousands	of	wrinkles,  arrière–pensées,	and	masks	on	its	face.	It	has	made European	humanity	more	clever,	and	not	only	cunning	from	a	theological	standpoint.	By the	spirit	which	it	has	thus	given	to	European	humanity—in	conjunction	with	the	power	of abnegation,	and	very	often	in	conjunction	with	the	profound	conviction	and	loyalty	of	that abnegation—it	has	perhaps	chiselled	and	shaped	the	most	subtle	individualities	which have	ever	existed	in	human	society:	the	individualities	of	the	higher	ranks	of	the	Catholic clergy,	especially	when	these	priests	have	sprung	from	a	noble	family,	and	have	brought	to their	work,	from	the	very	beginning,	the	innate	grace	of	gesture,	the	dominating	glance	of the	eye,	and	beautiful	hands	and	feet.	Here	the	human	face	acquires	that	spiritualisation brought	about	by	the	continual	ebb	and	flow	of	two	kinds	of	happiness	(the	feeling	of power	and	the	feeling	of	submission)	after	a	carefully–planned	manner	of	living	has conquered	the	beast	in	man.	Here	an	activity,	which	consists	in	blessing,	forgiving	sins, and	representing	the	Almighty,	ever	keeps	alive	in	the	soul,  and	even	in	the	body,	the consciousness	of	a	supreme	mission;	here	we	find	that	noble	contempt	concerning	the perishable	nature	of	the	body,	of	well–being,	and	of	happiness,	peculiar	to	born	soldiers: their	 pride	lies	in	obedience,	a	distinctly	aristocratic	trait;	their	excuse	and	their	idealism arise	from	the	enormous	impossibility	of	their	task.	The	surpassing	beauty	and	subtleties of	these	princes	of	the	Church	have	always	proved	to	the	people	the	truth	of	the	Church;	a momentary	brutalisation	of	the	clergy	(such	as	came	about	in	Luther’s	time)	always tended	to	encourage	the	contrary	belief.	And	would	it	be	maintained	that	this	result	of beauty	and	human	subtlety,	shown	in	harmony	of	figure,	intellect,	and	task,	would	come	to an	end	with	religions?	and	that	nothing	higher	could	be	obtained,	or	even	conceived?
</i></p>

### Aphorism 63: *HATRED OF ONE’S NEIGHBOR*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Supposing	that	we	felt	towards	our	neighbour	as he	does	himself—Schopenhauer	calls	this	compassion,	though	it	would	be	more	correct	to call	it	auto–passion,	fellow–feeling—we	should	be	compelled	to	hate	him,	if,	like	Pascal, he	thought	himself	hateful.	And	this	was	probably	the	general	feeling	of	Pascal	regarding mankind,	and	also	that	of	ancient	Christianity,	which,	under	Nero,	was	“convicted”	of odium	generis	humani,	as	Tacitus	has	recorded.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 68: *THE FIRST CHRISTIAN*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The	whole	world	still	believes	in	the	literary	career	of	the “Holy	Ghost,”	or	is	still	influenced	by	the	effects	of	this	belief:	when	we	look	into	our Bibles	we	do	so	for	the	purpose	of	“edifying	ourselves,”	to	find	a	few	words	of	comfort for	our	misery,	be	it	great	or	small—in	short,	we	read	ourselves	into	it	and	out	of	it.	But who—apart	from	a	few	learned	men—know	that	it	likewise	records	the	history	of	one	of the	most	ambitious	and	importunate	souls	that	ever	existed,	of	a	mind	full	of	superstition and	cunning:	the	history	of	the	Apostle	Paul?	Nevertheless,	without	this	singular	history, without	the	tribulations	and	passions	of	such	a	mind,	and	of	such	a	soul,	there	would	have been	no	Christian	kingdom;	we	should	have	scarcely	have	even	heard	of	a	little	Jewish sect,	the	founder	of	which	died	on	the	Cross.	It	is	true	that,	if	this	history	had	been understood	in	time,	if	we	had	read,  really	read,	the	writings	of	St.	Paul,	not	as	the revelations	of	the	“Holy	Ghost,”	but	with	honest	and	independent	minds,	oblivious	of	all our	personal	troubles—there	were	no	such	readers	for	fifteen	centuries—it	would	have been	all	up	with	Christianity	long	ago:	so	searchingly	do	these	writings	of	the	Jewish Pascal	lay	bare	the	origins	of	Christianity,	just	as	the	French	Pascal	let	us	see	its	destiny and	how	it	will	ultimately	perish.	That	the	ship	of	Christianity	threw	overboard	no inconsiderable	part	of	its	Jewish	ballast,	that	it	was	able	to	sail	into	the	waters	of	the heathen	and	actually	did	do	so:	this	is	due	to	the	history	of	one	single	man,	this	apostle who	was	so	greatly	troubled	in	mind	and	so	worthy	of	pity,	but	who	was	also	very disagreeable	to	himself	and	to	others. <br>
<br>
This	man	suffered	from	a	fixed	idea,	or	rather	a	fixed	question,	an	ever–present	and	ever–
burning	question:	what	was	the	 meaning	of	the	Jewish	Law?	and,	more	especially,  the fulfilment	of	this	Law?	In	his	youth	he	had	done	his	best	to	satisfy	it,	thirsting	as	he	did	for that	highest	distinction	which	the	Jews	could	imagine—this	people,	which	raised	the imagination	of	moral	loftiness	to	a	greater	elevation	than	any	other	people,	and	which alone	succeeded	in	uniting	the	conception	of	a	holy	God	with	the	idea	of	sin	considered	as an	offence	against	this	holiness.	St.	Paul	became	at	once	the	fanatic	defender	and	guard– of–honour	of	this	God	and	His	Law.	Ceaselessly	battling	against	and	lying	in	wait	for	all transgressors	of	this	Law	and	those	who	presumed	to	doubt	it,	he	was	pitiless	and	cruel towards	all	evil–doers,	whom	he	would	fain	have	punished	in	the	most	rigorous	fashion possible. <br>
<br>
Now,	however,	he	was	aware	in	his	own	person	of	the	fact	that	such	a	man	as	himself— violent,	sensual,	melancholy,	and	malicious	in	his	hatred— could	not	fulfil	the	Law;	and furthermore,	what	seemed	strangest	of	all	to	him,	he	saw	that	his	boundless	craving	for power	was	continually	provoked	to	break	it,	and	that	he	could	not	help	yielding	to	this impulse.	Was	it	really	“the	flesh”	which	made	him	a	trespasser	time	and	again?	Was	it	not rather,	as	it	afterwards	occurred	to	him,	the	Law	itself,	which	continually	showed	itself	to be	impossible	to	fulfil,	and	seduced	men	into	transgression	with	an	irresistible	charm?	But at	that	time	he	had	not	thought	of	this	means	of	escape.	As	he	suggests	here	and	there,	he had	many	things	on	his	conscience—hatred,	murder,	sorcery,	idolatry,	debauchery, drunkenness,	and	orgiastic	revelry,—and	to	however	great	an	extent	he	tried	to	soothe	his conscience,	and,	even	more,	his	desire	for	power,	by	the	extreme	fanaticism	of	his	worship for	and	defence	of	the	Law,	there	were	times	when	the	thought	struck	him:	“It	is	all	in vain!	The	anguish	of	the	unfulfilled	Law	cannot	be	overcome.”	Luther	must	have experienced	similar	feelings,	when,	in	his	cloister,	he	endeavoured	to	become	the	ideal man	of	his	imagination;	and,	as	Luther	one	day	began	to	hate	the	ecclesiastical	ideal,	and the	Pope,	and	the	saints,	and	the	whole	clergy,	with	a	hatred	which	was	all	the	more	deadly as	he	could	not	avow	it	even	to	himself,	an	analogous	feeling	took	possession	of	St.	Paul. <br>
<br>
The	Law	was	the	Cross	on	which	he	felt	himself	crucified.	How	he	hated	it!	What	a grudge	he	owed	it!	How	he	began	to	look	round	on	all	sides	to	find	a	means	for	its	total annihilation,	that	he	might	no	longer	be	obliged	to	fulfil	it	himself!	And	at	last	a	liberating thought,	together	with	a	vision—which	was	only	to	be	expected	in	the	case	of	an	epileptic like	himself—flashed	into	his	mind:	to	him,	the	stern	upholder	of	the	Law—who,	in	his innermost	heart,	was	tired	to	death	of	it—there	appeared	on	the	lonely	path	that	Christ, with	the	divine	effulgence	on	His	countenance,	and	Paul	heard	the	words:	“Why persecutest	thou	Me?” 
What	actually	took	place,	then,	was	this:	his	mind	was	suddenly	enlightened,	and	he	said to	himself:	“It	is	unreasonable	to	persecute	this	Jesus	Christ!	Here	is	my	means	of	escape, here	is	my	complete	vengeance,	here	and	nowhere	else	have	I	the	destroyer	of	the	Law	in my	hands!”	The	sufferer	from	anguished	pride	felt	himself	restored	to	health	all	at	once, his	moral	despair	disappeared	in	the	air;	for	morality	itself	was	blown	away,	annihilated— that	is	to	say,  fulfilled,	there	on	the	Cross!	Up	to	that	time	that	ignominious	death	had seemed	to	him	to	be	the	principal	argument	against	the	“Messiahship”	proclaimed	by	the followers	of	the	new	doctrine:	but	what	if	it	were	necessary	for	doing	away	with	the	Law? <br>
<br>
The	enormous	consequences	of	this	thought,	of	this	solution	of	the	enigma,	danced	before his	eyes,	and	he	at	once	became	the	happiest	of	men.	The	destiny	of	the	Jews,	yea,	of	all mankind,	seemed	to	him	to	be	intertwined	with	this	instantaneous	flash	of	enlightenment: he	held	the	thought	of	thoughts,	the	key	of	keys,	the	light	of	lights;	history	would henceforth	revolve	round	him!	For	from	that	time	forward	he	would	be	the	apostle	of	the annihilation	of	the	Law!	To	be	dead	to	sin—that	meant	to	be	dead	to	the	Law	also;	to	be	in the	flesh—that	meant	to	be	under	the	Law!	To	be	one	with	Christ—that	meant	to	have become,	like	Him,	the	destroyer	of	the	Law;	to	be	dead	with	Him—that	meant	likewise	to be	dead	to	the	Law.	Even	if	it	were	still	possible	to	sin,	it	would	not	at	any	rate	be	possible to	sin	against	the	Law:	“I	am	above	the	Law,”	thinks	Paul;	adding,	“If	I	were	now	to acknowledge	the	Law	again	and	to	submit	to	it,	I	should	make	Christ	an	accomplice	in	the sin”;	for	the	Law	was	there	for	the	purpose	of	producing	sin	and	setting	it	in	the foreground,	as	an	emetic	produces	sickness.	God	could	not	have	decided	upon	the	death	of Christ	had	it	been	possible	to	fulfil	the	Law	without	it;	henceforth,	not	only	are	all	sins expiated,	but	sin	itself	is	abolished;	henceforth	the	Law	is	dead;	henceforth	“the	flesh”	in which	it	dwelt	is	dead—or	at	all	events	dying,	gradually	wasting	away.	To	live	for	a	short time	longer	amid	this	decay!—this	is	the	Christian’s	fate,	until	the	time	when,	having become	one	with	Christ,	he	arises	with	Him,	sharing	with	Christ	the	divine	glory,	and becoming,	like	Christ,	a	“Son	of	God.”	Then	Paul’s	exaltation	was	at	its	height,	and	with	it the	importunity	of	his	soul—the	thought	of	union	with	Christ	made	him	lose	all	shame,	all submission,	all	constraint,	and	his	ungovernable	ambition	was	shown	to	be	revelling	in	the expectation	of	divine	glories. 
Such	was	the	first	Christian,	the	inventor	of	Christianity!	before	him	there	were	only	a	few Jewish	sectaries.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 70: *THE USE OF A COARSE INTELLECT*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The	Christian	Church	is	an	encyclopædia	of primitive	cults	and	views	of	the	most	varied	origin;	and	is,	in	consequence,	well	adapted	to missionary	work:	in	former	times	she	could—and	still	does—go	wherever	she	would,	and in	doing	so	always	found	something	resembling	herself,	to	which	she	could	assimilate herself	and	gradually	substitute	her	own	spirit	for	it.	It	is	not	to	what	is	Christian	in	her usages,	but	to	what	is	universally	pagan	in	them,	that	we	have	to	attribute	the	development of	this	universal	religion.	Her	thoughts,	which	have	their	origin	at	once	in	the	Judaic	and in	the	Hellenic	spirit,	were	able	from	the	very	beginning	to	raise	themselves	above	the exclusiveness	and	subtleties	of	races	and	nations,	as	above	prejudices.	Although	we	may admire	the	power	which	makes	even	the	most	difficult	things	coalesce,	we	must nevertheless	not	overlook	the	contemptible	qualities	of	this	power—the	astonishing coarseness	and	narrowness	of	the	Church’s	intellect	when	it	was	in	process	of	formation,	a coarseness	which	permitted	it	to	accommodate	itself	to	any	diet,	and	to	digest contradictions	like	pebbles.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 72: *THE “LIFE AFTER DEATH"*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Christianity	found	the	idea	of	punishment	in	hell	in	the entire	Roman	Empire:	for	the	numerous	mystic	cults	have	hatched	this	idea	with	particular satisfaction	as	being	the	most	fecund	egg	of	their	power.	Epicurus	thought	he	could	do nothing	better	for	his	followers	than	to	tear	this	belief	up	by	the	roots:	his	triumph	found its	finest	echo	in	the	mouth	of	one	of	his	disciples,	the	Roman	Lucretius,	a	poet	of	a gloomy,	though	afterwards	enlightened,	temperament.	Alas!	his	triumph	had	come	too soon:	Christianity	took	under	its	special	protection	this	belief	in	subterranean	horrors, which	was	already	beginning	to	die	away	in	the	minds	of	men;	and	that	was	clever	of	it. <br>
<br>
For,	without	this	audacious	leap	into	the	most	complete	paganism,	how	could	it	have proved	itself	victorious	over	the	popularity	of	Mithras	and	Isis?	In	this	way	it	managed	to bring	timorous	folk	over	to	its	side—the	most	enthusiastic	adherents	of	a	new	faith!	The Jews,	being	a	people	which,	like	the	Greeks,	and	even	in	a	greater	degree	than	the	Greeks, loved	and	still	love	life,	had	not	cultivated	that	idea	to	any	great	extent:	the	thought	of final	death	as	the	punishment	of	the	sinner,	death	without	resurrection	as	an	extreme menace:	this	was	sufficient	to	impress	these	peculiar	men,	who	did	not	wish	to	get	rid	of their	bodies,	but	hoped,	with	their	refined	Egypticism,	to	preserve	them	for	ever.	(A Jewish	martyr,	about	whom	we	may	read	in	the	Second	Book	of	the	Maccabees,	would	not think	of	giving	up	his	intestines,	which	had	been	torn	out:	he	wanted	to	have	them	at	the resurrection:	quite	a	Jewish	characteristic!)<br>
<br>
Thoughts	of	eternal	damnation	were	far	from	the	minds	of	the	early	Christians:	they thought	they	were	 delivered	from	death,	and	awaited	a	transformation	from	day	to	day,	but not	death.	(What	a	curious	effect	the	first	death	must	have	produced	on	these	expectant people!	How	many	different	feelings	must	have	been	mingled	together—astonishment, exultation,	doubt,	shame,	and	passion!	Verily,	a	subject	worthy	of	a	great	artist!)	St.	Paul could	say	nothing	better	in	praise	of	his	Saviour	than	that	he	had	opened	the	gates	of immortality	to	everybody—he	did	not	believe	in	the	resurrection	of	those	who	had	not been	saved:	more	than	this,	by	reason	of	his	doctrine	of	the	impossibility	of	carrying	out the	Law,	and	of	death	considered	as	a	consequence	of	sin,	he	even	suspected	that,	up	to that	time,	no	one	had	become	immortal	(or	at	all	events	only	a	very	few,	solely	owing	to special	grace	and	not	to	any	merits	of	their	own):	it	was	only	in	his	time	that	immortality had	begun	to	open	its	gates—and	only	a	few	of	the	elect	would	finally	gain	admittance,	as the	pride	of	the	elect	cannot	help	saying. <br>
<br>
In	other	places,	where	the	impulse	towards	life	was	not	so	strong	as	among	the	Jews	and the	Christian	Jews,	and	where	the	prospect	of	immortality	did	not	appear	to	be	more valuable	than	the	prospect	of	a	final	death,	that	pagan,	yet	not	altogether	un–Jewish addition	of	Hell	became	a	very	useful	tool	in	the	hands	of	the	missionaries:	then	arose	the new	doctrine	that	even	the	sinners	and	the	unsaved	are	immortal,	the	doctrine	of	eternal damnation,	which	was	more	powerful	than	the	idea	of	a	 final	death,	which	thereafter began	to	fade	away.	It	was	science	alone	which	could	overcome	this	idea,	at	the	same	time brushing	aside	all	other	ideas	about	death	and	an	after–life.	We	are	poorer	in	one particular:	the	“life	after	death”	has	no	further	interest	for	us!	an	indescribable	blessing, which	is	as	yet	too	recent	to	be	considered	as	such	throughout	the	world.	And	Epicurus	is once	more	triumphant.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 79: *A PROPOSAL*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
If,	according	to	the	arguments	of	Pascal	and	Christianity,	our	ego	is always	hateful,	how	can	we	permit	and	suppose	other	people,	whether	God	or	men,	to	love it?	It	would	be	contrary	to	all	good	principles	to	let	ourselves	be	loved	when	we	know very	well	that	we	deserve	nothing	but	hatred—not	to	speak	of	other	repugnant	feelings.  “But	this	is	the	very	Kingdom	of	Grace.”	Then	you	look	upon	your	love	for	your neighbour	as	a	grace?	Your	pity	as	a	grace?	Well,	then,	if	you	can	do	all	this,	there	is	no reason	why	you	should	not	go	a	step	further:	love	yourselves	through	grace,	and	then	you will	no	longer	find	your	God	necessary,	and	the	entire	drama	of	the	Fall	and	Redemption of	mankind	will	reach	its	last	act	in	yourselves!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 84: *THE PHILOLOGY OF CHRISTIANITY*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
How	little	Christianity	cultivates	the	sense	of honesty	can	be	inferred	from	the	character	of	the	writings	of	its	learned	men.	They	set	out their	conjectures	as	audaciously	as	if	they	were	dogmas,	and	are	but	seldom	at	a disadvantage	in	regard	to	the	interpretation	of	Scripture.	Their	continual	cry	is:	“I	am right,	for	it	is	written”—and	then	follows	an	explanation	so	shameless	and	capricious	that a	philologist,	when	he	hears	it,	must	stand	stock–still	between	anger	and	laughter,	asking himself	again	and	again:	Is	it	possible?	Is	it	honest?	Is	it	even	decent? <br>
<br>
It	is	only	those	who	never—or	always—attend	church	that	underestimate	the	dishonesty with	which	this	subject	is	still	dealt	in	Protestant	pulpits;	in	what	a	clumsy	fashion	the preacher	takes	advantage	of	his	security	from	interruption;	how	the	Bible	is	pinched	and squeezed;	and	how	the	people	are	made	acquainted	with	every	form	of	 the	art	of	false reading. <br>
<br>
When	all	is	said	and	done,	however,	what	can	be	expected	from	the	effects	of	a	religion which,	during	the	centuries	when	it	was	being	firmly	established,	enacted	that	huge philological	farce	concerning	the	Old	Testament?	I	refer	to	that	attempt	to	tear	the	Old Testament	from	the	hands	of	the	Jews	under	the	pretext	that	it	contained	only	Christian doctrines	and	 belonged	to	the	Christians	as	the	true	people	of	Israel,	while	the	Jews	had merely	arrogated	it	to	themselves	without	authority.	This	was	followed	by	a	mania	of would–be	interpretation	and	falsification,	which	could	not	under	any	circumstances	have been	allied	with	a	good	conscience.	However	strongly	Jewish	savants	protested,	it	was everywhere	sedulously	asserted	that	the	Old	Testament	alluded	everywhere	to	Christ,	and nothing	but	Christ,	more	especially	His	Cross,	and	thus,	wherever	reference	was	made	to wood,	a	rod,	a	ladder,	a	twig,	a	tree,	a	willow,	or	a	staff,	such	a	reference	could	not	but	be a	prophecy	relating	to	the	wood	of	the	Cross:	even	the	setting–up	of	the	Unicorn	and	the Brazen	Serpent,	even	Moses	stretching	forth	his	hands	in	prayer—yea,	the	very	spits	on which	the	Easter	lambs	were	roasted:	all	these	were	allusions	to	the	Cross,	and,	as	it	were, preludes	to	it!	Did	any	one	who	kept	on	asserting	these	things	ever	 believe	in	them?	Let	it not	be	forgotten	that	the	Church	did	not	shrink	from	putting	interpolations	in	the	text	of the	Septuagint	( e.g. 	Ps.	xcvi.	10),	in	order	that	she	might	later	on	make	use	of	these interpolated	passages	as	Christian	prophecies.	They	were	engaged	in	a	struggle,	and thought	of	their	foes	rather	than	of	honesty.
</i></p>

## Book II
### Aphorism 103: *THERE ARE TWO CLASSES OF PEOPLE WHO DENY MORALITY*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
To	deny morality	may	mean,	in	the	first	place,	to	deny	the	moral	inducements	which,	men	pretend, have	urged	them	on	to	their	actions,—which	is	equivalent	to	saying	that	morality	merely consists	of	words	and	forms,	part	of	that	coarse	and	subtle	deceit	(especially	self–deceit) which	is	characteristic	of	mankind,	and	perhaps	more	especially	of	those	men	who	are celebrated	for	their	virtues.	In	the	second	place,	it	may	mean	our	denying	that	moral judgments	are	founded	on	truths.	It	is	admitted	in	such	a	case	that	these	judgments	are,	in fact,	the	motives	of	the	actions,	but	that	in	this	way	it	is	really	errors	as	the	basis	of	all moral	judgments	which	urge	men	on	to	their	moral	actions.	This	is	my	point	of	view;	but	I should	be	far	from	denying	that	in	very	many	cases	a	subtle	suspicion	in	accordance	with the	former	point	of	view— i.e. 	in	the	spirit	of	La	Rochefoucauld—is	also	justifiable,	and	in any	case	of	a	high	general	utility.—Therefore	I	deny	morality	in	the	same	way	as	I	deny alchemy,  i.e. 	I	deny	its	hypotheses;	but	I	do	not	deny	that	there	have	been	alchemists	who believed	in	these	hypotheses	and	based	their	actions	upon	them.	I	also	deny	immorality— not	that	innumerable	people	feel	immoral,	but	that	there	is	any	true	reason	why	they should	feel	so.	I	should	not,	of	course,	deny—unless	I	were	a	fool—that	many	actions which	are	called	immoral	should	be	avoided	and	resisted;	and	in	the	same	way	that	many which	are	called	moral	should	be	performed	and	encouraged;	but	I	hold	that	in	both	cases these	actions	should	be	performed	from	motives	other	than	those	which	have	prevailed	up to	the	present	time.	We	must	learn	anew	in	order	that	at	last,	perhaps	very	late	in	the	day, we	may	be	able	to	do	something	more:	feel	anew.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 105: *PSEUDO–EGOISM*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The	great	majority	of	people,	whatever	they	may	think	and	say about	their	“egoism,”	do	nothing	for	their	ego	all	their	life	long,	but	only	for	a	phantom	of this	ego	which	has	been	formed	in	regard	to	them	by	their	friends	and	communicated	to them.	As	a	consequence,	they	all	live	in	a	haze	of	impersonal	and	half–personal	opinions and	of	arbitrary	and,	as	it	were,	poetic	valuations:	the	one	always	in	the	head	of	another, and	this	head,	again,	in	the	head	of	somebody	else—a	queer	world	of	phantoms	which manages	to	give	itself	a	rational	appearance!	This	haze	of	opinions	and	habits	grows	in extent	and	lives	almost	independently	of	the	people	it	surrounds;	it	is	it	which	gives	rise	to the	immense	effect	of	general	judgments	on	“man”—all	those	men,	who	do	not	know themselves,	believe	in	a	bloodless	abstraction	which	they	call	“man,”  i.e. 	in	a	fiction;	and every	change	caused	in	this	abstraction	by	the	judgments	of	powerful	individualities	(such as	princes	and	philosophers)	produces	an	extraordinary	and	irrational	effect	on	the	great majority,—for	the	simple	reason	that	not	a	single	individual	in	this	haze	can	oppose	a	real ego,	an	ego	which	is	accessible	to	and	fathomed	by	himself,	to	the	universal	pale	fiction, which	he	could	thereby	destroy.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 114: *ON THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE SUFFERER*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The	state	of	sick	men	who	have suffered	long	and	terribly	from	the	torture	inflicted	upon	them	by	their	illness,	and	whose reason	has	nevertheless	not	been	in	any	way	affected,	is	not	without	a	certain	amount	of value	in	our	search	for	knowledge—quite	apart	from	the	intellectual	benefits	which	follow upon	every	profound	solitude	and	every	sudden	and	justified	liberation	from	duties	and habits.	The	man	who	suffers	severely	looks	forth	with	terrible	calmness	from	his	state	of suffering	upon	outside	things:	all	those	little	lying	enchantments,	by	which	things	are usually	surrounded	when	seen	through	the	eye	of	a	healthy	person,	have	vanished	from	the sufferer;	his	own	life	even	lies	there	before	him,	stripped	of	all	bloom	and	colour.	If	by chance	it	has	happened	that	up	to	then	he	has	lived	in	some	kind	of	dangerous	fantasy,	this extreme	disenchantment	through	pain	is	the	means,	and	possibly	the	only	means,	of extricating	him	from	it.	(It	is	possible	that	this	is	what	happened	to	the	Founder	of Christianity	when	suspended	from	the	Cross;	for	the	bitterest	words	ever	pronounced,	“My God,	My	God,	why	hast	Thou	forsaken	Me?”	if	understood	in	their	deepest	sense,	as	they ought	to	be	understood,	contain	the	evidence	of	a	complete	disillusionment	and enlightenment	in	regard	to	the	deceptions	of	life:	in	that	moment	of	supreme	suffering Christ	obtained	a	clear	insight	into	Himself,	just	as	in	the	poet’s	narrative	did	the	poor dying	Don	Quixote.)<br>
<br>
The	formidable	tension	of	the	intellect	that	wishes	to	hold	its	own	against	pain	shows everything	that	one	now	looks	upon	in	a	new	light,	and	the	inexpressible	charm	of	this new	light	is	often	powerful	enough	to	withstand	all	the	seductiveness	of	suicide	and	to make	the	continuation	of	life	seem	very	desirable	to	the	sufferer.	His	mind	scornfully	turns to	the	warm	and	comfortable	dream–world	in	which	the	healthy	man	moves	about thoughtlessly,	and	he	thinks	with	contempt	of	the	noblest	and	most	cherished	illusions	in which	he	formerly	indulged.	He	experiences	delight	in	conjuring	up	this	contempt	as	if from	the	depths	of	hell,	and	thus	inflicting	the	bitterest	sufferings	upon	his	soul:	it	is	by this	counterpoise	that	he	bears	up	against	physical	suffering—he	feels	that	such	a counterpoise	is	now	essential!	In	one	terrible	moment	of	clear–sightedness	he	says	to himself,	“Be	for	once	thine	own	accuser	and	hangman;	for	once	regard	thy	suffering	as	a punishment	which	thou	hast	inflicted	on	thyself!	Enjoy	thy	superiority	as	a	judge:	better still,	enjoy	thine	own	will	and	pleasure,	thy	tyrannical	arbitrariness!	Raise	thyself	above thy	life	as	above	thy	suffering,	and	look	down	into	the	depth	of	reason	and	unreason!”<br>
<br>
Our	pride	revolts	as	it	never	did	before,	it	experiences	an	incomparable	charm	in defending	life	against	such	a	tyrant	as	suffering	and	against	all	the	insinuations	of	this tyrant,	who	would	fain	urge	us	to	give	evidence	against	life,—we	are	taking	the	part	of	life in	the	face	of	this	tyrant.	In	this	state	of	mind	we	take	up	a	bitter	stand	against	all pessimism	in	order	that	it	may	not	appear	to	be	a	consequence	of	our	condition,	and	thus humiliate	us	as	conquered	ones.	The	charm	of	being	just	in	our	judgments	was	also	never greater	than	now;	for	now	this	justice	is	a	triumph	over	ourselves	and	over	so	irritated	a state	of	mind	that	unfairness	of	judgment	might	be	excused,—but	we	will	not	be	excused, it	is	now,	if	ever,	that	we	wish	to	show	that	we	need	no	excuse.	We	pass	through downright	orgies	of	pride. <br>
<br>
And	now	appears	the	first	ray	of	relief,	of	recovery,	and	one	of	its	first	effects	is	that	we turn	against	the	preponderance	of	our	pride:	we	call	ourselves	foolish	and	vain,	as	if	we had	undergone	some	unique	experience.	We	humiliate	ungratefully	this	all–powerful pride,	the	aid	of	which	enabled	us	to	endure	the	pain	we	suffered,	and	we	call	vehemently for	some	antidote	for	this	pride:	we	wish	to	become	strangers	to	ourselves	and	to	be	freed from	our	own	person	after	pain	has	forcibly	made	us	personal	too	long.	“Away	with	this pride,”	we	cry,	“it	was	only	another	illness	and	convulsion!”	Once	more	we	look	longingly at	men	and	nature	and	recollect	with	a	sorrowful	smile	that	now	since	the	veil	has	fallen we	regard	many	things	concerning	them	in	a	new	and	different	light,—but	we	are refreshed	by	once	more	seeing	the	softened	lights	of	life,	and	emerge	from	that	fearfully dispassionate	daylight	in	which	we	as	sufferers	saw	things	and	through	things.	We	do	not get	angry	when	we	see	the	charms	of	health	resume	their	play,	and	we	contemplate	the sight	as	if	transformed,	gently	and	still	fatigued.	In	this	state	we	cannot	listen	to	music without	weeping.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 130: *AIMS? WILL?*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
We	have	accustomed	ourselves	to	believe	in	two	kingdoms,	the	domain of	purposes	and	volition,	and	the	domain	of	chance.	In	this	latter	domain	everything	is done	senselessly,	there	is	a	continual	going	to	and	fro	without	any	one	being	able	to	say why	or	wherefore.	We	stand	in	awe	of	this	powerful	realm	of	the	great	cosmic	stupidity, for	in	most	instances	we	learn	to	know	it	when	it	falls	down	upon	the	other	world,	that	of aims	and	intentions,	like	a	slate	from	a	roof,	always	overwhelming	some	beautiful	purpose of	ours.<br>
<br>
This	belief	in	these	two	kingdoms	arises	from	ancient	romanticism	and	legend:	we	clever dwarfs,	with	all	our	will	and	aims,	are	interfered	with,	knocked	down,	and	very	often crushed	to	death	by	those	ultra–stupid	giants,	the	accidents,—but	in	spite	of	this	we	should not	like	to	be	deprived	of	the	fearful	poetry	of	their	proximity,	for	these	monsters	very often	make	their	appearance	when	life	in	the	spider’s	web	of	definite	aims	has	become	too tiresome	or	too	anxious	for	us,	and	they	sometimes	bring	about	a	divine	diversion	when their	hands	for	once	tear	the	whole	web	in	pieces,—not	that	these	irrational	beings	ever intend	to	do	what	they	do,	or	even	observe	it.	But	their	coarse	and	bony	hands	rend	our web	as	if	it	were	thin	air.<br>
<br>
Moira	was	the	name	given	by	the	Greeks	to	this	realm	of	the	incalculable	and	of	sublime and	eternal	limitedness;	and	they	set	it	round	their	gods	like	a	horizon	beyond	which	they could	neither	see	nor	act,—with	that	secret	defiance	of	the	gods	which	one	meets	with	in different	nations;	the	gods	are	worshipped,	but	a	final	trump	card	is	held	in	readiness	to play	against	them.	As	instances	of	this	we	may	recollect	that	the	Indians	and	the	Persians, who	conceived	all	their	gods	as	having	to	depend	upon	the	sacrifices	of	mortals,	so	that	if it	came	to	the	worst	the	mortals	could,	at	least,	let	the	gods	die	of	starvation;	or	the	gods	of the	stubborn	and	melancholy	Scandinavians,	who	enjoyed	a	quiet	revenge	in	the	thought that	a	twilight	of	the	gods	was	to	come	as	some	compensation	for	the	perpetual	fear	which their	evil	gods	caused	them.	The	case	of	Christianity	was	very	different,	for	its	essential feelings	were	not	those	of	the	Indians,	Persians,	Greeks,	or	Scandinavians.	Christianity commanded	its	disciples	to	worship	in	the	dust	the	spirit	of	power,	and	to	kiss	the	very dust.	It	gave	the	world	to	understand	that	this	omnipotent	“realm	of	stupidity”	was	not	so stupid	as	it	seemed,	and	that	we,	on	the	contrary,	were	stupid	when	we	could	not	perceive that	behind	this	realm	stood	God	Himself:	He	who,	although	fond	of	dark,	crooked	and wonderful	ways,	at	last	brought	everything	to	a	“glorious	end.”	This	new	myth	of	God, who	had	hitherto	been	mistaken	for	a	race	of	giants	or	Moira,	and	who	was	now	Himself the	spinner	and	weaver	of	webs	and	purposes	even	more	subtle	than	those	of	our	own intellect—so	subtle,	indeed,	that	they	appear	to	be	incomprehensible	and	even unreasonable—this	myth	was	so	bold	a	transformation	and	so	daring	a	paradox	that	the over–refined	ancient	world	could	not	resist	it,	however	extravagant	and	contradictory	the thing	seemed:	for,	let	it	be	said	in	confidence,	there	was	a	contradiction	in	it,—if	our intellect	cannot	divine	the	intellect	and	aims	of	God,	how	did	it	divine	this	quality	of	its intellect	and	this	quality	of	God’s	intellect?<br>
<br>
In	more	modern	times,	indeed,	the	doubt	has	increased	as	to	whether	the	slate	that	falls from	the	roof	is	really	thrown	by	“Divine	love,”	and	mankind	again	harks	back	to	the	old romance	of	giants	and	dwarfs.	Let	us	learn	then,	for	it	is	time	we	did	so,	that	even	in	our supposed	separate	domain	of	aims	and	reason	the	giants	likewise	rule.	And	our	aims	and reason	are	not	dwarfs,	but	giants.	And	our	own	webs	are	just	as	often	and	as	clumsily	rent by	ourselves	as	by	the	slate.	And	not	everything	is	purpose	that	is	called	purpose,	and	still less	is	everything	will	that	is	called	will.	And	if	you	come	to	the	conclusion,	“Then	there	is only	one	domain,	that	of	stupidity	and	hazard?”	it	must	be	added	that	possibly	there	is only	one	domain,	possibly	there	is	neither	will	nor	aim,	and	we	may	only	have	imagined these	things.	Those	iron	hands	of	necessity	that	shake	the	dice–box	of	chance	continue their	game	indefinitely:	hence,	it	must	happen	that	certain	throws	perfectly	resemble	every degree	of	appropriateness	and	good	sense.	It	may	be	that	our	own	voluntary	acts	and purposes	are	merely	such	throws,	and	that	we	are	too	circumscribed	and	vain	to	conceive our	extremely	circumscribed	state!	that	we	ourselves	shake	the	dice–box	with	iron	hands, and	do	nothing	in	our	most	deliberate	actions	but	play	the	game	of	necessity.	Possibly!	To rise	beyond	this	“possibly”	we	should	indeed	have	been	guests	in	the	Underworld,	playing at	dice	and	betting	with	Proserpine	at	the	table	of	the	goddess	herself.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 132: *THE LAST ECHOES OF CHRISTIANITY IN MORALS*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
“On	n’est	bon	que	par	la pitié:	il	faut	donc	qu’il	y	ait	quelque	pitié	dans	tous	nos	sentiments”—so	says	morality nowadays.	And	how	does	this	come	about?	The	fact	that	the	man	who	performs	social, sympathetic,	disinterested,	and	benevolent	actions	is	now	considered	as	the	moral	man: this	is	perhaps	the	most	general	effect,	the	most	complete	transformation,	that	Christianity has	produced	in	Europe;	perhaps	in	spite	of	itself,	and	not	by	any	means	because	this	was part	of	its	essential	doctrine.	But	this	was	the	residuum	of	those	Christian	feelings	that prevailed	at	the	time	when	the	contrary	and	thoroughly	selfish	faith	in	the	“one	thing needful,”	the	absolute	importance	of	eternal	and	personal	salvation,	together	with	the dogmas	upon	which	this	belief	had	rested,	were	gradually	receding,	and	when	the auxiliary	beliefs	in	“love”	and	“love	of	one’s	neighbour,”	harmonising	with	the extraordinary	practice	of	charity	by	the	Church,	were	thereby	coming	to	the	front.	The more	people	gradually	became	separated	from	the	dogmas,	the	more	did	they	seek	some sort	of	justification	for	this	separation	in	a	cult	of	the	love	of	humanity:	not	to	fall	short	in this	respect	of	the	Christian	ideal,	but	to	excel	it	if	possible,	was	the	secret	stimulus	of	all the	French	free–thinkers	from	Voltaire	to	Auguste	Comte;	and	this	latter	with	his	famous moral	formula	“vivre	pour	autrui”	has	indeed	out–christianised	even	Christianity!<br>
<br>
It	was	Schopenhauer	in	Germany	and	John	Stuart	Mill	in	England	who	were	the	means	of bringing	into	the	greatest	prominence	this	doctrine	of	sympathetic	affections	and	of	pity	or utility	to	others	as	a	principle	of	action;	but	these	men	themselves	were	only	echoes.	From about	the	time	of	the	French	Revolution	these	doctrines	have	manifested	themselves	in various	places	with	enormous	force.	Since	then	they	have	shown	themselves	in	their coarsest	as	well	has	their	most	subtle	form,	and	all	Socialistic	principles	have	almost involuntarily	taken	their	stand	on	the	common	ground	of	this	doctrine.	At	the	present	time there	is	perhaps	no	more	widely	spread	prejudice	than	that	of	thinking	that	we	know	what really	and	truly	constitutes	morality.	Every	one	now	seems	to	learn	with	satisfaction	that society	is	beginning	to	adapt	the	individual	to	the	general	needs,	and	that	it	is	at	the	same time	the	happiness	and	sacrifice	of	each	one	to	consider	himself	as	a	useful	member	and instrument	of	the	whole.	They	have	still,	however,	doubts	as	to	the	form	in	which	this whole	is	to	be	looked	for,	whether	in	a	state	already	existing,	or	in	one	which	has	yet	to	be established,	or	in	a	nation,	or	in	an	international	brotherhood,	or	in	new	and	small economic	communities.	On	this	point	there	is	still	much	reflection,	doubt,	struggling, excitement,	and	passion;	but	it	is	pleasant	and	wonderful	to	observe	the	unanimity	with which	the	“ego”	is	called	upon	to	practice	self–denial,	until,	in	the	form	of	adaptation	to the	whole,	it	once	again	secures	its	own	fixed	sphere	of	rights	and	duties,—until,	indeed,	it has	become	something	quite	new	and	different.	Nothing	else	is	being	attempted,	whether admitted	or	not,	than	the	complete	transformation,	even	the	weakening	and	suppression	of the	individual:	the	supporters	of	the	majority	never	tire	of	enumerating	and	anathematising all	that	is	bad,	hostile,	lavish,	expensive,	and	luxurious	in	the	form	of	individual	existence that	has	hitherto	prevailed;	they	hope	that	society	may	be	administered	in	a	cheaper,	less dangerous,	more	uniform,	and	more	harmonious	way	when	nothing	is	left	but	large corporations	and	their	members.	All	that	is	considered	as	good	which	in	any	way corresponds	to	this	desire	for	grouping	men	into	one	particular	society,	and	to	the	minor cravings	which	necessarily	accompany	this	desire,—this	is	the	chief	moral	current	of	our time;	sympathy	and	social	feelings	are	working	hand	in	glove.	(Kant	is	still	outside	of	this movement:	he	expressly	teaches	that	we	should	be	insensible	to	the	sufferings	of	others	if our	benevolence	is	to	have	any	moral	value,—a	doctrine	which	Schopenhauer,	very angrily,	as	may	easily	be	imagined,	described	as	the	Kantian	absurdity.
</i></p>

## Book III
### Aphorism 163: *AGAINST ROUSSEAU*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
If	it	is	true	that	there	is	something	contemptible	about	our civilisation,	we	have	two	alternatives:	of	concluding	with	Rousseau	that,	“This	despicable civilisation	is	to	blame	for	our	bad	morality,”	or	to	infer,	contrary	to	Rousseau’s	view,	that “Our	good	morality	is	to	blame	for	this	contemptible	civilisation.	Our	social	conceptions of	good	and	evil,	weak	and	effeminate	as	they	are,	and	their	enormous	influence	over	both body	and	soul,	have	had	the	effect	of	weakening	all	bodies	and	souls	and	of	crushing	all unprejudiced,	independent,	and	self–reliant	men,	the	real	pillars	of	a	strong	civilisation: wherever	we	still	find	the	evil	morality	to–day,	we	see	the	last	crumbling	ruins	of	these pillars.”	Thus	let	paradox	be	opposed	by	paradox!	It	is	quite	impossible	for	the	truth	to	lie with	both	sides:	and	can	we	say,	indeed,	that	it	lies	with	either?	Decide	for	yourself.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 185: *BEGGARS*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Beggars	ought	to	be	suppressed;	because	we	get	angry	both	when	we	help them	and	when	we	do	not.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 189: *HIGH POLITICS*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Whatever	may	be	the	influence	in	high	politics	of	utilitarianism	and the	vanity	of	individuals	and	nations,	the	sharpest	spur	which	urges	them	onwards	is	their need	for	the	feeling	of	power—a	need	which	rises	not	only	in	the	souls	of	princes	and rulers,	but	also	gushes	forth	from	time	to	time	from	inexhaustible	sources	in	the	people. <br>
<br>
The	time	comes	again	and	again	when	the	masses	are	ready	to	stake	their	lives	and	their fortunes,	their	consciences	and	their	virtue,	in	order	that	they	may	secure	that	highest	of	all enjoyments	and	rule	as	a	victorious,	tyrannical,	and	arbitrary	nation	over	other	nations	(or at	all	events	think	that	they	do). 
On	occasions	such	as	these,	feelings	of	prodigality,	sacrifice,	hope,	confidence, extraordinary	audacity,	and	enthusiasm	will	burst	forth	so	abundantly	that	a	sovereign	who is	ambitious	or	far–sighted	will	be	able	to	seize	the	opportunity	for	making	war,	counting upon	the	good	conscience	of	his	people	to	hide	his	injustice.	Great	conquerors	have always	given	utterance	to	the	pathetic	language	of	virtue;	they	have	always	been surrounded	by	crowds	of	people	who	felt	themselves,	as	it	were,	in	a	state	of	exaltation and	would	listen	to	none	but	the	most	elevated	oratory.	The	strange	madness	of	moral judgments!	When	man	experiences	the	sensation	of	power	he	feels	and	calls	himself	good; and	at	exactly	the	same	time	the	others	who	have	to	endure	his	power	call	him	evil!—Hesiod,	in	his	fable	of	the	epochs	of	man,	has	twice	in	succession	depicted	the	same epoch,	that	of	the	heroes	of	Homer,	and	has	thus	made	two	epochs	out	of	one:	to	those who	lived	under	the	terrible	iron	heel	of	those	adventurous	despots,	or	had	heard	their ancestors	speak	of	them,	the	epoch	appeared	to	be	evil;	but	the	descendants	of	those chivalric	races	worshipped	it	as	the	“good	old	times,”	and	as	an	almost	ideally	blissful	age. The	poet	could	thus	not	help	doing	what	he	did,—his	audience	probably	included	the descendants	of	both	races.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 205: *THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
One	of	the	spectacles	which	the	next	century	will	invite	us to	witness	is	the	decision	regarding	the	fate	of	the	European	Jews.	It	is	quite	obvious	now that	they	have	cast	their	die	and	crossed	their	Rubicon:	the	only	thing	that	remains	for them	is	either	to	become	masters	of	Europe	or	to	lose	Europe,	as	they	once	centuries	ago lost	Egypt,	where	they	were	confronted	with	similar	alternatives.	In	Europe,	however,	they have	gone	through	a	schooling	of	eighteen	centuries	such	as	no	other	nation	has	ever undergone,	and	the	experiences	of	this	dreadful	time	of	probation	have	benefited	not	only the	Jewish	community	but,	even	to	a	greater	extent,	the	individual.	As	a	consequence	of this,	the	resourcefulness	of	the	modern	Jews,	both	in	mind	and	soul,	is	extraordinary. <br>
<br>
Amongst	all	the	inhabitants	of	Europe	it	is	the	Jews	least	of	all	who	try	to	escape	from	any deep	distress	by	recourse	to	drink	or	to	suicide,	as	other	less	gifted	people	are	so	prone	to do.	Every	Jew	can	find	in	the	history	of	his	own	family	and	of	his	ancestors	a	long	record of	instances	of	the	greatest	coolness	and	perseverance	amid	difficulties	and	dreadful situations,	an	artful	cunning	in	fighting	with	misfortune	and	hazard.	And	above	all	it	is their	bravery	under	the	cloak	of	wretched	submission,	their	heroic	 spernere	se	sperni	that surpasses	the	virtues	of	all	the	saints. <br>
<br>
People	wished	to	make	them	contemptible	by	treating	them	contemptibly	for	nearly twenty	centuries,	and	refusing	them	access	to	all	honourable	positions	and	dignities,	and by	pushing	them	further	down	into	the	meaner	trades—and	under	this	process	indeed	they have	not	become	any	cleaner.	But	contemptible?	They	have	never	ceased	for	a	moment from	believing	themselves	qualified	for	the	very	highest	functions,	nor	have	the	virtues	of the	suffering	ever	ceased	to	adorn	them.	Their	manner	of	honouring	their	parents	and children,	the	rationality	of	their	marriages	and	marriage	customs,	distinguishes	them amongst	all	Europeans.	Besides	this,	they	have	been	able	to	create	for	themselves	a	sense of	power	and	eternal	vengeance	from	the	very	trades	that	were	left	to	them	(or	to	which they	were	abandoned).	Even	in	palliation	of	their	usury	we	cannot	help	saying	that, without	this	occasional	pleasant	and	useful	torture	inflicted	on	their	scorners,	they	would have	experienced	difficulty	in	preserving	their	self–respect	for	so	long.	For	our	self–respect	depends	upon	our	ability	to	make	reprisals	in	both	good	and	evil	things. <br>
<br>
Nevertheless,	their	revenge	never	urges	them	on	too	far,	for	they	all	have	that	liberty	of mind,	and	even	of	soul,	produced	in	men	by	frequent	changes	of	place,	climate,	and customs	of	neighbours	and	oppressors,	they	possess	by	far	the	greatest	experience	in	all human	intercourse,	and	even	in	their	passions	they	exercise	the	caution	which	this experience	has	developed	in	them.	They	are	so	certain	of	their	intellectual	versatility	and shrewdness	that	they	never,	even	when	reduced	to	the	direst	straits,	have	to	earn	their bread	by	manual	labour	as	common	workmen,	porters,	or	farm	hands.	In	their	manners	we can	still	see	that	they	have	never	been	inspired	by	chivalric	and	noble	feelings,	or	that	their bodies	have	ever	been	girt	with	fine	weapons:	a	certain	obtrusiveness	alternates	with	a submissiveness	which	is	often	tender	and	almost	always	painful. <br>
<br>
Now,	however,	that	they	unavoidably	inter–marry	more	and	more	year	after	year	with	the noblest	blood	of	Europe,	they	will	soon	have	a	considerable	heritage	of	good	intellectual and	physical	manners,	so	that	in	another	hundred	years	they	will	have	a	sufficiently	noble aspect	not	to	render	themselves,	as	masters,	ridiculous	to	those	whom	they	will	have subdued.	And	this	is	important!	and	therefore	a	settlement	of	the	question	is	still premature.	They	themselves	know	very	well	that	the	conquest	of	Europe	or	any	act	of violence	is	not	to	be	thought	of;	but	they	also	know	that	some	day	or	other	Europe	may, like	a	ripe	fruit,	fall	into	their	hands,	if	they	do	not	clutch	at	it	too	eagerly.	In	the meantime,	it	is	necessary	for	them	to	distinguish	themselves	in	all	departments	of European	distinction	and	to	stand	in	the	front	rank:	until	they	shall	have	advanced	so	far	as to	determine	themselves	what	distinction	shall	mean.	Then	they	will	be	called	the	pioneers and	guides	of	the	Europeans	whose	modesty	they	will	no	longer	offend. <br>
<br>
And	then	where	shall	an	outlet	be	found	for	this	abundant	wealth	of	great	impressions accumulated	during	such	an	extended	period	and	representing	Jewish	history	for	every Jewish	family,	this	wealth	of	passions,	virtues,	resolutions,	resignations,	struggles,	and conquests	of	all	kinds—where	can	it	find	an	outlet	but	in	great	intellectual	men	and	works! <br>
<br>
On	the	day	when	the	Jews	will	be	able	to	exhibit	to	us	as	their	own	work	such	jewels	and golden	vessels	as	no	European	nation,	with	its	shorter	and	less	profound	experience,	can or	could	produce,	when	Israel	shall	have	changed	its	eternal	vengeance	into	an	eternal benediction	for	Europe:	then	that	seventh	day	will	once	more	appear	when	old	Jehovah may	rejoice	in	Himself,	in	His	creation,	in	His	chosen	people—and	all,	all	of	us,	will rejoice	with	Him!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 207: *THE ATTITUDE OF THE GERMANS TO MORALITY*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
A	German	is	capable	of	great things,	but	he	is	unlikely	to	accomplish	them,	for	he	obeys	whenever	he	can,	as	suits	a naturally	lazy	intellect.	If	he	is	ever	in	the	dangerous	situation	of	having	to	stand	alone	and cast	aside	his	sloth,	when	he	finds	it	no	longer	possible	to	disappear	like	a	cipher	in	a number	(in	which	respect	he	is	far	inferior	to	a	Frenchman	or	an	Englishman),	he	shows his	true	strength:	then	he	becomes	dangerous,	evil,	deep,	and	audacious,	and	exhibits	to the	light	of	day	that	wealth	of	latent	energy	which	he	had	previously	carried	hidden	in himself,	and	in	which	no	one,	not	even	himself,	had	ever	believed.	When	in	such	a	case	a German	obeys	himself—it	is	very	exceptional	for	him	to	do	so—he	does	so	with	the	same heaviness,	inflexibility,	and	endurance	with	which	he	obeys	his	prince	and	performs	his official	duties:	so	that,	as	I	have	said,	he	is	then	capable	of	great	things	which	bear	no relation	to	the	“weak	disposition”	he	attributes	to	himself. <br>
<br>
As	a	rule,	however,	he	is	afraid	of	depending	upon	himself	alone,	he	is	afraid	of	taking	the initiative:	that	is	why	Germany	uses	up	so	many	officials	and	so	much	ink.	Light–heartedness	is	a	stranger	to	the	German;	he	is	too	timid	for	it:	but	in	entirely	new	situations which	rouse	him	from	his	torpor	he	exhibits	an	almost	frivolous	spirit—he	then	delights	in the	novelty	of	his	new	position	as	if	it	were	some	intoxicating	drink,	and	he	is,	as	we know,	quite	a	connoisseur	in	intoxication.	It	thus	happens	that	the	German	of	the	present day	is	almost	always	frivolous	in	politics,	though	even	here	he	has	the	advantage	and prejudice	of	thoroughness	and	seriousness;	and,	although	he	may	take	full	advantage	of these	qualities	in	negotiations	with	other	political	powers,	he	nevertheless	rejoices inwardly	at	being	able	for	once	in	his	life	to	feel	enthusiastic	and	capricious,	to	show	his fondness	for	innovations,	and	to	change	persons,	parties,	and	hopes	as	if	they	were	masks. <br>
<br>
Those	learned	German	scholars,	who	hitherto	have	been	considered	as	the	most	German of	Germans,	were	and	perhaps	still	are	as	good	as	the	German	soldiers	on	account	of	their profound	and	almost	childish	inclination	to	obey	in	all	external	things,	and	on	account	of being	often	compelled	to	stand	alone	in	science	and	to	answer	for	many	things:	if	they	can only	preserve	their	proud,	simple,	and	patient	disposition,	and	their	freedom	from	political madness	at	those	times	when	the	wind	changes,	we	may	yet	expect	great	things	from	them—such	as	they	are	or	such	as	they	were,	they	are	the	embryonic	stage	of	something	higher. <br>
<br>
So	far	the	advantages	and	disadvantages	of	the	Germans,	including	even	their	learned men,	have	been	that	they	were	more	given	to	superstition	and	showed	greater	eagerness	to believe	than	any	of	the	other	nations;	their	vices	are,	and	always	have	been,	their drunkenness	and	suicidal	inclinations	(the	latter	a	proof	of	the	clumsiness	of	their	intellect, which	is	easily	tempted	to	throw	away	the	reins).	Their	danger	is	to	be	sought	in everything	that	binds	down	the	faculties	of	reason	and	unchains	the	passions	(as,	for example,	the	excessive	use	of	music	and	spirits),	for	the	German	passion	acts	contrarily	to its	own	advantage,	and	is	as	self–destructive	as	the	passions	of	the	drunkard.	Indeed, German	enthusiasm	is	worth	less	than	that	of	other	nations,	for	it	is	barren.	When	a German	ever	did	anything	great	it	was	done	at	a	time	of	danger,	or	when	his	courage	was high,	with	his	teeth	firmly	set	and	his	prudence	on	the	alert,	and	often	enough	in	a	fit	of generosity.—Intercourse	with	these	Germans	is	indeed	advisable,	for	almost	every	one	of them	has	something	to	give,	if	we	can	only	understand	how	to	make	him	find	it,	or	rather recover	it	(for	he	is	very	untidy	in	storing	away	his	knowledge). <br>
<br>
Well:	when	people	of	this	type	occupy	themselves	with	morals,	what	precisely	will	be	the morality	that	will	satisfy	them?	In	the	first	place,	they	will	wish	to	see	idealised	in	their morals	their	sincere	instinct	for	obedience.	“Man	must	have	something	which	he	can implicitly	obey”—this	is	a	German	sentiment,	a	German	deduction;	it	is	the	basis	of	all German	moral	teaching.	How	different	is	the	impression,	however,	when	we	compare	this with	the	entire	morality	of	the	ancient	world!	All	those	Greek	thinkers,	however	varied they	may	appear	to	us,	seem	to	resemble,	as	moralists,	the	gymnastic	teacher	who encourages	his	pupils	by	saying,	“Come,	follow	me!	Submit	to	my	discipline!	Then perhaps	you	may	carry	off	the	prize	from	all	the	other	Greeks.”	Personal	distinction:	such was	the	virtue	of	antiquity.	Submission,	obedience,	whether	public	or	private:	such	is German	virtue.	Long	before	Kant	set	forth	his	doctrine	of	the	Categorical	Imperative, Luther,	actuated	by	the	same	impulse,	said	that	there	surely	must	be	a	being	in	whom	man could	trust	implicitly—it	was	his	proof	of	the	existence	of	God;	it	was	his	wish,	coarser and	more	popular	than	that	of	Kant,	that	people	should	implicitly	obey	a	person	and	not	an idea,	and	Kant	also	finally	took	his	roundabout	route	through	morals	merely	that	he	might secure	obedience	for	the	person.	This	is	indeed	the	worship	of	the	German,	the	more	so	as there	is	now	less	worship	left	in	his	religion. <br>
<br>
The	Greeks	and	Romans	had	other	opinions	on	these	matters,	and	would	have	laughed	at such	“there	must	be	a	being”:	it	is	part	of	the	boldness	of	their	Southern	nature	to	take	up	a stand	against	“implicit	belief,”	and	to	retain	in	their	inmost	heart	a	trace	of	scepticism against	all	and	every	one,	whether	God,	man,	or	idea.	The	thinker	of	antiquity	went	even further,	and	said	 nil	admirari:	in	this	phrase	he	saw	reflected	all	philosophy.	A	German, Schopenhauer,	goes	so	far	in	the	contrary	direction	as	to	say:	 admirari	id	est	philosophari. <br>
<br>
But	what	if,	as	happens	now	and	then,	the	German	should	attain	to	that	state	of	mind which	would	enable	him	to	perform	great	things?	if	the	hour	of	exception	comes,	the	hour of	disobedience?	I	do	not	think	Schopenhauer	is	right	in	saying	that	the	single	advantage the	Germans	have	over	other	nations	is	that	there	are	more	atheists	among	them	than elsewhere;	but	I	do	know	this:	whenever	the	German	reaches	the	state	in	which	he	is capable	of	great	things,	he	invariably	raises	himself	above	morals!	And	why	should	he not?	Now	he	has	something	new	to	do,	viz.	to	command—either	himself	or	others!	But this	German	morality	of	his	has	not	taught	him	how	to	command!	Commanding	has	been forgotten	in	it.
</i></p>

## Book IV
### Aphorism 272: *THE PURIFICATION OF RACES*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
It	is	probable	that	there	are	no	pure	races,	but	only races	which	have	become	purified,	and	even	these	are	extremely	rare. [8]	We	more	often meet	with	crossed	races,	among	whom,	together	with	the	defects	in	the	harmony	of	the bodily	forms	(for	example	when	the	eyes	do	not	accord	with	the	mouth)	we	necessarily always	find	defects	of	harmony	in	habits	and	appreciations.	(Livingstone	heard	some	one say,	“God	created	white	and	black	men,	but	the	devil	created	the	half–castes.”) Crossed	races	are	always	at	the	same	time	crossed	cultures	and	crossed	moralities:	they are,	as	a	rule,	more	evil,	cruel,	and	restless.	Purity	is	the	final	result	of	innumerable adjustments,	absorptions,	and	eliminations;	and	progress	towards	purity	in	a	race	is	shown by	the	fact	that	the	latent	strength	in	the	race	is	more	and	more	restricted	to	a	few	special functions,	whilst	it	formerly	had	to	carry	out	too	many	and	often	contradictory	things.  Such	a	restriction	will	always	have	the	appearance	of	an	impoverishment,	and	must	be judged	with	prudence	and	moderation.	In	the	long	run,	however,	when	the	process	of purification	has	come	to	a	successful	termination,	all	those	forces	which	were	formerly wasted	in	the	struggle	between	the	disharmonious	qualities	are	at	the	disposal	of	the organism	as	a	whole,	and	this	is	why	purified	races	have	always	become	stronger	and more	beautiful.—The	Greeks	may	serve	us	as	a	model	of	a	purified	race	and	culture!—and it	is	to	be	hoped	that	some	day	a	pure	European	race	and	culture	may	arise.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 298: *HERO–WORSHIP AND ITS FANATICS*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
HERO–WORSHIP	AND	ITS	FANATICS.—The	fanatic	of	an	ideal	that	possesses	flesh and	blood	is	right	as	a	rule	so	long	as	he	assumes	a	negative	attitude,	and	he	is	terrible	in his	negation:	he	knows	what	he	denies	as	well	as	he	knows	himself,	for	the	simple	reason that	he	comes	thence,	that	he	feels	at	home	there,	and	that	he	has	always	the	secret	fear	of being	forced	to	return	there	some	day.	He	therefore	wishes	to	make	his	return	impossible by	the	manner	of	his	negation.	As	soon	as	he	begins	to	affirm,	however,	he	partly	shuts	his eyes	and	begins	to	idealise	(frequently	merely	for	the	sake	of	annoying	those	who	have stayed	at	home).	We	might	say	that	there	was	something	artistic	about	this—agreed,	but there	is	also	something	dishonest	about	it. <br>
<br>
The	idealist	of	a	person	imagines	this	person	to	be	so	far	from	him	that	he	can	no	longer see	him	distinctly,	and	then	he	travesties	that	which	he	can	just	perceive	into	something “beautiful”—that	is	to	say,	symmetrical,	vaguely	outlined,	uncertain.	Since	he	wishes	to worship	from	afar	that	ideal	which	floats	on	high	in	the	distance,	he	finds	it	essential	to build	a	temple	for	the	object	of	his	worship	as	a	protection	from	the	 profanum	vulgus.	He brings	into	this	temple	for	the	object	of	his	worship	all	the	venerable	and	sanctified	objects which	he	still	possesses,	so	that	his	ideal	may	benefit	by	their	charm,	and	that,	nourished in	this	way,	it	may	grow	more	and	more	divine.	In	the	end	he	really	succeeds	in	forming his	God,	but,	alas	for	him!	there	is	some	one	who	knows	how	all	this	has	been	done,	viz. <br>
<br>
his	intellectual	conscience;	and	there	is	also	some	one	who,	quite	unconsciously,	begins	to protest	against	these	things,	viz.	the	deified	one	himself,	who,	in	consequence	of	all	this worship,	praise,	and	incense,	now	becomes	completely	unbearable	and	shows	himself	in the	most	obvious	and	dreadful	manner	to	be	non–divine,	and	only	too	human. <br>
<br>
In	a	case	like	this	there	is	only	one	means	of	escape	left	for	such	a	fanatic;	he	patiently suffers	himself	and	his	fellows	to	be	maltreated,	and	interprets	all	this	misery	 in	maiorem dei	gloriam	by	a	new	kind	of	self–deceit	and	noble	falsehood.	He	takes	up	a	stand	against himself,	and	in	doing	so	experiences,	as	an	interpreter	and	ill–treated	person,	something like	martyrdom—and	in	this	way	he	climbs	to	the	height	of	his	conceit.	Men	of	this	kind to	be	found,	for	example,	in	the	entourage	of	Napoleon:	indeed,	perhaps	it	may	have	been he	who	inspired	the	soul	of	his	century	with	that	romantic	prostration	in	the	presence	of the	“genius”	and	the	“hero,”	which	was	so	foreign	to	the	spirit	of	rationalism	of	the nineteenth	century—a	man	about	whom	even	Byron	was	not	ashamed	to	say	that	he	was	a “worm	compared	with	such	a	being.”	(The	formulæ	of	this	prostration	have	been discovered	by	Thomas	Carlyle,	that	arrogant	old	muddle–head	and	grumbler,	who	spent his	long	life	in	trying	to	romanticise	the	common	sense	of	his	Englishmen:	but	in	vain!)
</i></p>

# General notes

