## Author
[[Friedrich Nietzsche]]

## Genres
#Polemics 
#Philosophy

# Contents
## Maxims and Arrows
### Maxim 8
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
From the military school of life. – What does not kill me makes me stronger.
</i></p>

### Maxim 12
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
If we possess our why of life we can put up with almost any how. – Man does not strive after happiness; only the Englishman does that.
</i></p>

## The Problem of Socrates
### Section 2
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
This irreverent notion that the great sages are declining types first dawned on me in regard to just the case in which learned and unlearned prejudice is most strongly opposed to it: I recognized Socrates and Plato as symptoms of decay, as agents of the dissolution of Greece, as pseudo-Greek, as anti-Greek (Birth of Tragedy, 1872).*. That consensus sapientium – I saw more and more clearly – proves least of all that they were right about what they were in accord over: it proves rather that they themselves, these wisest men, were in some way in physiological accord since they stood – had to stand – in the same negative relation to life. Judgements, value judgements concerning life, for or against, can in the last resort never be true: they possess value only as symptoms, they come into consideration only as symptoms – in themselves such judgements are stupidities. One must reach out and try to grasp this astonishing finesse, that the value of life cannot be estimated. Not by a living man, because he is a party to the dispute, indeed its object, and not the judge of it; not by a dead one, for another reason. – For a philosopher to see a problem in the value of life thus even constitutes an objection to him, a question-mark as to his wisdom, a piece of unwisdom. – What? and all these great wise men – they have not only been décadents, they have not even been wise? – But I shall get back to the problem of Socrates.
</i></p>

### Section 5
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
With Socrates Greek taste undergoes a change in favour of dialectics: what is really happening when that happens? It is above all the defeat of a nobler taste; with dialectics the rabble gets on top. Before Socrates, the dialectical manner was repudiated in good society: it was regarded as a form of bad manners, one was compromised by it. Young people were warned against it. And all such presentation of one’s reasons was regarded with mistrust. Honest things, like honest men, do not carry their reasons exposed in this fashion. It is indecent to display all one’s goods. What has first to have itself proved is of little value. Wherever authority is still part of accepted usage and one does not ‘give reasons’ but commands, the dialectician is a kind of buffoon: he is laughed at, he is not taken seriously. – Socrates was the buffoon who got himself taken seriously: what was really happening when that happened?
</i></p>

### Section 11
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
I have intimated the way in which Socrates exercised fascination: he seemed to be a physician, a saviour. Is it necessary to go on to point out the error which lay in his faith in ‘rationality at any cost’? – It is self-deception on the part of philosophers and moralists to imagine that by making war on décadence they therewith elude décadence themselves. This is beyond their powers: what they select as an expedient, as a deliverance, is itself only another expression of décadence – they alter its expression, they do not abolish the thing itself. Socrates was a misunderstanding: the entire morality of improvement, the Christian included, has been a misunderstanding.… The harshest daylight, rationality at any cost, life bright, cold, circumspect, conscious, without instinct, in opposition to the instincts, has itself been no more than a form of sickness, another form of sickness – and by no means a way back to ‘virtue’, to ‘health’, to happiness…. To have to combat one’s instincts – that is the formula for décadence: as long as life is ascending, happiness and instinct are one. –
</i></p>

### Section 12
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
– Did he himself grasp that, this shrewdest of all self-deceivers? Did he at last say that to himself in the wisdom of his courage for death?… Socrates wanted to die – it was not Athens, it was he who handed himself the poison cup, who compelled Athens to hand him the poison cup.… ‘Socrates is no physician,’ he said softly to himself: ‘death alone is a physician here.… Socrates himself has only been a long time sick…’
</i></p>

## 'Reason' in Philosophy
### Section 6
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
It will be a matter for gratitude if I now compress so fundamental and new an insight into four theses: I shall thereby make it easier to understand, I shall thereby challenge contradiction.<br>
<br>
First proposition. The grounds upon which ‘this’ world has been designated as apparent establish rather its reality – another kind of reality is absolutely undemonstrable.<br>
<br>
Second proposition. The characteristics which have been assigned to the ‘real being’ of things are the characteristics of non-being, of nothingness – the ‘real world’ has been constructed out of the contradiction to the actual world: an apparent world indeed, in so far as it is no more than a moral-optical illusion.<br>
<br>
Third proposition. To talk about ‘another’ world than this is quite pointless, provided that an instinct for slandering, disparaging and accusing life is not strong within us: in the latter case we revenge ourselves on life by means of the phantasmagoria of ‘another’, a ‘better’ life.<br>
<br>
Fourth proposition. To divide the world into a ‘real’ and an ‘apparent’ world, whether in the manner of Christianity or in the manner of Kant (which is, after all, that of a cunning Christian –) is only a suggestion of décadence – a symptom of declining life.… That the artist places a higher value on appearance than on reality constitutes no objection to this proposition. For ‘appearance’ here signifies reality once more, only selected, strengthened, corrected.… The tragic artist is not a pessimist – it is precisely he who affirms all that is questionable and terrible in existence, he is Dionysian…
</i></p>

## Morality as Anti-Nature
### Section 3
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The spiritualization of sensuality is called love: it is a great triumph over Christianity. A further triumph is our spiritualization of enmity. It consists in profoundly grasping the value of having enemies: in brief, in acting and thinking in the reverse of the way in which one formerly acted and thought. The Church has at all times desired the destruction of its enemies: we, we immoralists and anti-Christians, see that it is to our advantage that the Church exist.… In politics, too, enmity has become much more spiritual – much more prudent, much more thoughtful, much more forbearing. Almost every party grasps that it is in the interest of its own self-preservation that the opposing party should not decay in strength; the same is true of grand politics. A new creation in particular, the new Reich for instance, has more need of enemies than friends: only in opposition does it feel itself necessary, only in opposition does it become necessary.… We adopt the same attitude towards the ‘enemy within’: there too we have spiritualized enmity, there too we have grasped its value. One is fruitful only at the cost of being rich in contradictions; one remains young only on condition the soul does not relax, does not long for peace.… Nothing has grown more alien to us than that desideratum of former times ‘peace of soul’, the Christian desideratum; nothing arouses less envy in us than the moral cow and the fat contentment of the good conscience.… One has renounced grand life when one renounces war.… In many cases, to be sure, ‘peace of soul’ is merely a misunderstanding – something else that simply does not know how to give itself a more honest name. Here, briefly and without prejudice, are a few of them. ‘Peace of soul’ can, for example, be the gentle radiation of a rich animality into the moral (or religious) domain. Or the beginning of weariness, the first of the shadows which evening, every sort of evening, casts. Or a sign that the air is damp, that south winds are on the way. Or unconscious gratitude for a good digestion (sometimes called ‘philanthropy’). Or the quiescence of the convalescent for whom all things have a new taste and who waits.… Or the condition which succeeds a vigorous gratification of our ruling passion, the pleasant feeling of a rare satiety. Or the decrepitude of our will, our desires, our vices. Or laziness persuaded by vanity to deck itself out as morality. Or the appearance of a certainty, even a dreadful certainty, after the protracted tension and torture of uncertainty. Or the expression of ripeness and mastery in the midst of action, creation, endeavour, volition, a quiet breathing, ‘freedom of will’ attained.… Twilight of the Idols: who knows? perhaps that too is only a kind of ‘peace of soul’…
</i></p>

## The 'Improvers' of Mankind
### Section 3
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Let us take the other aspect of so-called morality, the breeding of a definite race and species. The most grandiose example of this is provided by Indian morality, sanctioned, as the ‘Law of Manu’, into religion. Here the proposed task is to breed no fewer than four races simultaneously: a priestly, a warrior, and a trading and farming race, and finally a menial race, the Sudras. Here we are manifestly no longer among animal-tamers: a species of human being a hundred times more gentle and rational is presupposed even to conceive the plan of such a breeding. One draws a breath of relief when coming out of the Christian sick-house and dungeon atmosphere into this healthier, higher, wider world. How paltry the ‘New Testament’ is compared with Manu, how ill it smells! – But this organization too needed to be dreadful – this time in struggle not with the beast but with its antithesis, with the non-bred human being, the hotchpotch human being, the Chandala. And again it had no means of making him weak and harmless other than making him sick – it was the struggle with the ‘great majority’. Perhaps there is nothing which outrages our feelings more than these protective measures of Indian morality. The third edict, for example (Avadana-Shastra I), that ‘concerning unclean vegetables’, ordains that the only nourishment permitted the Chandala shall be garlic and onions, in view of the fact that holy scripture forbids one to give them corn or seed-bearing fruits or water or fire. The same edict lays it down that the water they need must not be taken from rivers or springs or pools, but only from the entrances to swamps and holes made by the feet of animals. They are likewise forbidden to wash their clothes or to wash themselves, since the water allowed them as an act of charity must be used only for quenching the thirst. Finally, the Sudra women are forbidden to assist the Chandala women in childbirth, and the latter are likewise forbidden to assist one another.… – The harvest of such hygienic regulations did not fail to appear: murderous epidemics, hideous venereal diseases and, as a consequence, ‘the law of the knife’ once more, ordaining circumcision for the male and removal of the labia minora for the female children. – Manu himself says: ‘The Chandala are the fruit of adultery, incest and crime’ (– this being the necessary consequence of the concept ‘breeding’). ‘They shall have for clothing only rags from corpses, for utensils broken pots, for ornaments old iron, for worship only evil spirits; they shall wander from place to place without rest. They are forbidden to write from left to right and to use the right hand for writing: the employment of the right hand and of the left-to-right motion is reserved for the virtuous, for people of race.’ –
</i></p>

### Section 4
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
These regulations are instructive enough: in them we find for once Aryan humanity, quite pure, quite primordial – we learn that the concept ‘pure blood’ is the opposite of a harmless concept. It becomes clear, on the other hand, in which people the hatred, the Chandala hatred for this ‘humanity’ has been immortalized, where it has become religion, where it has become genius.… From this point of view, the Gospels are documents of the first rank; the Book of Enoch even more so. – Christianity, growing from Jewish roots and comprehensible only as a product of this soil, represents the reaction against that morality of breeding, of race, of privilege – it is the anti-Aryan religion par excellence: Christianity the revaluation of all Aryan values, the victory of Chandala values, the evangel preached to the poor and lowly, the collective rebellion of everything downtrodden, wretched, ill-constituted, under-privileged against the ‘race’ – undying Chandala revenge as the religion of love…
</i></p>

### Section 5
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The morality of breeding and the morality of taming are, in the means they employ to attain their ends, entirely worthy of one another: we may set down as our chief proposition that to make morality one must have the unconditional will to the contrary. This is the great, the uncanny problem which I have pursued furthest: the psychology of the ‘improvers’ of mankind. A small and really rather modest fact, that of so-called pia fraus, gave me my first access to this problem: pia fraus, the heritage of all philosophers and priests who have ‘improved’ mankind. Neither Manu nor Plato, neither Confucius nor the Jewish and Christian teachers, ever doubted their right to tell lies. Nor did they doubt their possession of other rights.… Expressed in a formula one might say: every means hitherto employed with the intention of making mankind moral has been thoroughly immoral. –
</i></p>

## Expeditions of an Untimely Man
### Polemic 37
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Whether we have grown more moral. – As was only to be expected, the whole ferocity of the moral stupidity which, as is well known, is considered morality as such in Germany, has launched itself against my concept ‘beyond good and evil’: I could tell some pretty stories about it. Above all, I was invited to reflect on the ‘undeniable superiority’ of our age in moral judgement, our real advance in this respect: compared with us, a Cesare Borgia was certainly not to be set up as a ‘higher man’, as a kind of superman, in the way I set him up.… A Swiss editor, that of the ‘Bund’, went so far – not without expressing his admiration of the courage for so hazardous an enterprise – as to ‘understand’ that the meaning of my work lay in a proposal to abolish all decent feeling. Much obliged! – by way of reply I permit myself to raise the question whether we have really grown more moral. That all the world believes so is already an objection to it.… We modern men, very delicate, very vulnerable and paying and receiving consideration in a hundred ways, imagine in fact that this sensitive humanity which we represent, this achieved unanimity in forbearance, in readiness to help, in mutual trust, is a positive advance, that with this we have gone far beyond the men of the Renaissance. But every age thinks in this way, has to think in this way. What is certain is that we would not dare to place ourselves in Renaissance circumstances, or even imagine ourselves in them: our nerves could not endure that reality, not to speak of our muscles. This incapacity, however, demonstrates, not an advance, but only a different, a more belated constitution, a weaker, more delicate, more vulnerable one, out of which is necessarily engendered a morality which is full of consideration. If we think away our delicacy and belatedness, our physiological ageing, then our morality of ‘humanization’ too loses its value at once – no morality has any value in itself – : we would even despise it. On the other hand, let us be in no doubt that we modern men, with our thick padding of humanity which dislikes to give the slightest offence, would provide the contemporaries of Cesare Borgia with a side-splitting comedy. We are, in fact, involuntarily funny beyond all measure, we with our modern ‘virtues’.… The decay of our hostile and mistrust-arousing instincts – and that is what constitutes our ‘advance’ – represents only one of the effects attending our general decay of vitality: it costs a hundred times more effort, more foresight, to preserve so dependent, so late an existence as we are. Here everyone helps everyone else, here everyone is to a certain degree an invalid and everyone a nurse. This is then called ‘virtue’ – : among men who knew a different kind of life, a fuller, more prodigal, more overflowing life, it would be called something else: ‘cowardice’, perhaps, ‘pitiableness’, ‘old woman’s morality’.… Our softening of customs – this is my thesis, my innovation if you like – is a consequence of decline; stern and frightful customs can, conversely, be a consequence of a superabundance of life. For in the latter case much may be risked, much demanded and much squandered. What was formerly a spice of life would be poison to us.… We are likewise too old, too belated, to be capable of indifference –also a form of strength: our morality of pity, against which I was the first to warn, that which one might call l’impressionisme morale, is one more expression of the physiological over-excitability pertaining to everything décadent. That movement which with Schopenhauer’s morality of pity attempted to present itself as scientific – a very unsuccessful attempt! – is the actual décadence movement in morality; as such it is profoundly related to Christian morality. Strong ages, noble cultures, see in pity, in ‘love of one’s neighbour’, in a lack of self and self-reliance, something contemptible. – Ages are to be assessed according to their positive forces – and by this assessment the age of the Renaissance, so prodigal and so fateful, appears as the last great age, and we, we moderns with our anxious care for ourselves and love of our neighbour, with our virtues of work, of unpretentiousness, of fair play, of scientificality – acquisitive, economical, machine-minded – appear as a weak age.… Our virtues are conditioned, are demanded by our weakness.… ‘Equality’, a certain actual rendering similar of which the theory of ‘equal rights’ is only the expression, belongs essentially to decline: the chasm between man and man, class and class, the multiplicity of types, the will to be oneself, to stand out – that which I call pathos of distance – characterizes every strong age. The tension, the range between the extremes is today growing less and less – the extremes themselves are finally obliterated to the point of similarity.… All our political theories and state constitutions, the ‘German Reich ‘certainly not excluded, are consequences, necessary effects of decline; the unconscious influence of décadence has gained ascendancy even over the ideals of certain of the sciences. My objection to the whole of sociology in England and France is that it knows from experience only the decaying forms of society and takes its own decaying instincts with perfect innocence as the norm of sociological value judgement. Declining life, the diminution of all organizing power, that is to say the power of separating, of opening up chasms, of ranking above and below, formulates itself in the sociology of today as the ideal.… Our Socialists are décadents, but Mr Herbert Spencer is also a décadent – he sees in the victory of altruism something desirable!…
</i></p>

### Polemic 38
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
My conception of freedom. – The value of a thing sometimes lies not in what one attains with it, but in what one pays for it – what it costs us. I give an example. Liberal institutions immediately cease to be liberal as soon as they are attained: subsequently there is nothing more thoroughly harmful to freedom than liberal institutions. One knows, indeed, what they bring about: they undermine the will to power, they are the levelling of mountain and valley exalted to a moral principle, they make small, cowardly and smug – it is the herd animal which triumphs with them every time. Liberalism: in plain words, reduction to the herd animal.… As long as they are still being fought for, these same institutions produce quite different effects; they then in fact promote freedom mightily. Viewed more closely, it is war which produces these effects, war for liberal institutions which as war permits the illiberal instincts to endure. And war is a training in freedom. For what is freedom? That one has the will to self-responsibility. That one preserves the distance which divides us. That one has become more indifferent to hardship, toil, privation, even to life. That one is ready to sacrifice men to one’s cause, oneself not excepted. Freedom means that the manly instincts that delight in war and victory have gained mastery over the other instincts – for example, over the instinct for ‘happiness’. The man who has become free – and how much more the mind that has become free – spurns the contemptible sort of well-being dreamed of by shopkeepers, Christians, cows, women, Englishmen and other democrats. The free man is a warrior. – How is freedom measured, in individuals as in nations? By the resistance which has to be overcome, by the effort it costs to stay aloft. One would have to seek the highest type of free man where the greatest resistance is constantly being overcome: five steps from tyranny, near the threshold of the danger of servitude. This is true psychologically when one understands by ‘tyrants’ pitiless and dreadful instincts, to combat which demands the maximum of authority and discipline towards oneself – finest type Julius Caesar –; it is also true politically: one has only to look at history. The nations which were worth something, which became worth something, never became so under liberal institutions: it was great danger which made of them something deserving reverence, danger which first teaches us to know our resources, our virtues, our shield and spear, our spirit – which compels us to be strong.… First principle: one must need strength, otherwise one will never have it. – Those great forcing-houses for strong human beings, for the strongest kind there has ever been, the aristocratic communities of the pattern of Rome and Venice, understood freedom in precisely the sense which I understand the word ‘freedom’: as something one has and does not have, something one wants, something one conquers…
</i></p>

### Polemic 39
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Criticism of modernity. – Our institutions are no longer fit for anything: everyone is unanimous about that. But the fault lies not in them but in us. Having lost all the instincts out of which institutions grow, we are losing the institutions themselves, because we are no longer fit for them. Democracy has always been the declining form of the power to organize: I have already, in Human, All Too Human, characterized modern democracy, together with its imperfect manifestations such as the ‘German Reich’, as the decaying form of the state. For institutions to exist there must exist the kind of will, instinct, imperative which is anti-liberal to the point of malice: the will to tradition, to authority, to centuries-long responsibility, to solidarity between succeeding generations backwards and forwards in infinitum. If this will is present, there is established something such as the Imperium Romanum: or such as Russia, the only power today which has durability in it, which can wait, which can still promise something – Russia, the antithesis of that pitiable European petty-state politics and nervousness which with the foundation of the German Reich has entered a critical phase.… The entire West has lost those instincts out of which institutions grow, out of which the future grows: perhaps nothing goes so much against the grain of its ‘modern spirit’ as this. One lives for today, one lives very fast – one lives very irresponsibly: it is precisely this which one calls ‘freedom’. That which makes institutions institutions is despised, hated, rejected: whenever the word ‘authority’ is so much as heard one believes oneself in danger of a new slavery. The décadence in the valuating instinct of our politicians, our political parties, goes so deep that they instinctively prefer that which leads to dissolution, that which hastens the end.… Witness modern marriage. It is obvious that all sense has gone out of modern marriage: which is, however, no objection to marriage but to modernity. The rationale of marriage lay in the legal sole responsibility of the man: marriage thereby had a centre of gravity, whereas now it limps with both legs. The rationale of marriage lay in its indissolubility in principle: it thereby acquired an accent which could make itself heard against the accidents of feeling, passion and the moment. It lay likewise in the responsibility of the families for the selection of mates. With the increasing indulgence of love matches one has simply eliminated the foundation of marriage, that alone which makes it an institution. One never establishes an institution on the basis of an idiosyncrasy, one does not, as aforesaid, establish marriage on the basis of ‘love’ – one establishes it on the basis of the sexual drive, the drive to own property (wife and child considered as property), the drive to dominate which continually organizes the smallest type of domain, the family, which needs children and heirs so as to retain, in a physiological sense as well, an achieved measure of power, influence, wealth, so as to prepare for protracted tasks, for a solidarity of instinct between the centuries. Marriage as an institution already includes in itself the affirmation of the largest, the most enduring form of organization: if society as a whole cannot stand security for itself to the most distant generations, then marriage has really no meaning. – Modern marriage has lost its meaning – consequently it is being abolished.
</i></p>

### Polemic 51
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Goethe is the last German before whom I feel reverence: he would have felt three things which I feel – we are also in agreement over the ‘Cross’.* I am often asked why it is I write in German: nowhere am I worse read than in the Fatherland. But who knows, after all, whether I even wish to be read today? – To create things upon which time tries its teeth in vain; in form and in substance to strive after a little immortality – I have never been modest enough to demand less of myself. The aphorism, the apophthegm, in which I am the first master among Germans, are the forms of ‘eternity’; my ambition is to say in ten sentences what everyone else says in a book – what everyone else does not say in a book…. I have given mankind the profoundest book it possesses, my Zarathustra: I shall shortly give it the most independent.† –
</i></p>

## What I Owe to the Ancients
### Polemic 4
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
I was the first to take seriously that wonderful phenomenon which bears the name Dionysos as a means to understanding the older Hellenic instinct, an instinct still exuberant and even overflowing: it is explicable only as an excess of energy. Whoever has investigated the Greeks, such as that profoundest student of their culture now living, Jacob Burckhardt of Basel, realizes at once the value of this line of approach: Burckhardt inserted a special section on the said phenomenon into his Culture of the Greeks. For the opposite of this, one should take a look at the almost laughable poverty of instinct displayed by German philologists whenever they approach the Dionysian. The celebrated Lobeck especially, who crept into this world of mysterious states with the honest self-confidence of a dried-up bookworm and by being nauseously frivolous and childish persuaded himself he was being scientific – Lobeck intimated, with a great display of erudition, that these curiosities were of no consequence. To be sure, the priests might have communicated a number of valuable pieces of information to the participants in such orgies – that wine arouses desire, for example, that man can live on fruit if need be, that plants bloom in spring and wither in autumn. As regards that strange wealth of rites, symbols and myths of orgiastic origin with which the antique world was quite literally overrun, Lobeck finds in them an occasion for becoming a trifle more ingenious. ‘When the Greeks had nothing else to do,’ he says (Aglao-phamus I, 672), ‘they used to laugh, jump, race about, or, since man sometimes feels a desire for this, they used to sit down and weep and wail. Others later came along and sought some reason for this striking behaviour; and thus those countless myths and legends arose to explain these practices. On the other hand, one believed that the droll activities which now took place on festival days necessarily pertained to festival celebration and retained them as an indispensable part of divine worship.’ – This is contemptible chatter and no one is likely to take a Lobeck seriously for a moment. We are affected quite differently when we probe the concept ‘Greek’ which Winckelmann and Goethe constructed for themselves and find it incompatible with that element out of which Dionysian art evolved – the orgy. I have, in fact, no doubt that Goethe would have utterly excluded anything of this kind from the possibilities of the Greek soul. Consequently Goethe did not understand the Greeks. For it is only in the Dionysian mysteries, in the psychology of the Dionysian condition, that the fundamental fact of the Hellenic instinct expresses itself – its ‘will to life’. What did the Hellene guarantee to himself with these mysteries? Eternal life, the eternal recurrence of life; the future promised and consecrated in the past; the triumphant Yes to life beyond death and change; true life as collective continuation of life through procreation, through the mysteries of sexuality. It was for this reason that the sexual symbol was to the Greeks the symbol venerable as such, the intrinsic profound meaning of all antique piety. Every individual detail in the act of procreation, pregnancy, birth, awoke the most exalted and solemn feelings. In the teachings of the mysteries, pain is sanctified: the ‘pains of childbirth’ sanctify pain in general – all becoming and growing, all that guarantees the future, postulates pain…. For the eternal joy in creating to exist, for the will to life eternally to affirm itself, the ‘torment of childbirth’ must also exist eternally…. All this is contained in the word Dionysos: I know of no more exalted symbolism than this Greek symbolism, the symbolism of the Dionysian. The profoundest instinct of life, the instinct for the future of life, for the eternity of life, is in this word experienced religiously – the actual road to life, procreation, as the sacred road.… It was only Christianity, with ressentiment against life in its foundations, which made of sexuality something impure: it threw filth on the beginning, on the prerequisite of our life…
</i></p>

### Polemic 5
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The psychology of the orgy as an overflowing feeling of life and energy within which even pain acts as a stimulus provided me with the key to the concept of the tragic feeling, which was misunderstood as much by Aristotle as it especially was by our pessimists. Tragedy is so far from providing evidence for pessimism among the Hellenes in Schopenhauer’s sense that it has to be considered the decisive repudiation of that idea and the counter-verdict to it. Affirmation of life even in its strangest and sternest problems, the will to life rejoicing in its own inexhaustibility through the sacrifice of its highest types – that is what I called Dionysian, that is what I recognized as the bridge to the psychology of the tragic poet. Not so as to get rid of pity and terror, not so as to purify oneself of a dangerous emotion through its vehement discharge – it was thus Aristotle understood it – : but, beyond pity and terror, to realize in oneself the eternal joy of becoming – that joy which also encompasses joy in destruction…. And with that I again return to the place from which I set out – Birth of Tragedy was my first revaluation of all values: with that I again plant myself in the soil out of which I draw all that I will and can – I, the last disciple of the philosopher Dionysos – I, the teacher of the eternal recurrence…
</i></p>

## The Hammer Speaks
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
‘Why so hard?’ the charcoal once said to the diamond; ‘for are we not close relations?’<br>
<br>
Why so soft? O my brothers, thus I ask you: for are you not – my brothers?<br>
<br>
Why so soft, unresisting and yielding? Why is there so much denial and abnegation in your hearts? So little fate in your glances?<br>
<br>
And if you will not be fates, if you will not be inexorable: how can you – conquer with me?<br>
<br>
And if your hardness will not flash and cut and cut to pieces: how can you one day – create with me?<br>
<br>
For all creators are hard. And it must seem bliss to you to press your hand upon millennia as upon wax,<br>
<br>
bliss to write upon the will of millennia as upon metal – harder than metal, nobler than metal. Only the noblest is perfectly hard.<br>
<br>
This new law-table do I put over you, O my brothers: Become hard!
</i></p>

# General notes

