## Author
[[Friedrich Nietzsche]]
## Genres
#Philosophy
#Poetry 
# Contents
## Book I
### Aphorism 1: *The Teachers of the Purpose of Life*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Whether I look upon men with a good or evil eye, I always find them engaged in but one task, each and every one of them: the preservation of the human race. And certainly not from any great love for it, but simply because nothing in them is older, stronger, more inexorable or invincible than that instinct – because this instinct is precisely the nature of our species and herd. With our usual short-sightedness, we are quick to divide our neighbours rather neatly into beneficial and injurious, into good and evil men; however, upon a great reckoning, when we further consider the whole, we become suspicious of this neat division, and in the end abandon it. Even the most injurious man may still be the most beneficial of all, with respect to the preservation of the human race; for he preserves in himself, or by his effect on others, impulses without which mankind might long since have languished or decayed. Hatred, malicious glee, rapacity and ambition and whatever else is called evil belong to this remarkable economy of preservation; to be sure, a costly, extravagant and on the whole rather foolish economy – but one which has thus far been proven to preserve our kind. My dear neighbour and fellow man, I doubt whether you even can live to the detriment of your species, that is to say ‘unreasonably’ and ‘badly’; perhaps that which could have damaged it died out thousands of years ago, and is now among things which are no longer possible even for God. Indulge your best or worst desires, and above all perish! Either way, you’re probably still somehow the patron and benefactor of mankind, and thus entitled to your eulogists – as well as your detractors! That said, you will never find anyone who could give you, the individual, even at your best, the ridicule which you deserve. You will never find anyone who could impress upon you how frog-like, how gnat-like, how boundlessly paltry you are, enough as is consistent with the truth! To laugh at yourself as you would have to laugh, to laugh out of the whole truth – so far, for that the best had not enough of a faculty for truth and the gifted far too little genius! Perhaps even laughter still has a future! Then, when mankind has subscribed to the proposition ‘the species is everything, the individual is always nothing’ – and for every man, the way is open at all times to this final liberation and irresponsibility – perhaps then laughter will be allied with wisdom, perhaps then there will be nothing but ‘Joyous Science’. For the time being, things are quite different; for the time being, the comedy of life has not yet ‘become conscious’ of itself; for the time being, it is still the age of tragedy, the age of moralities and religions. What does it indicate, this endless procession of moral and religious founders, authors of strife over moral standards, teachers of remorse and religious war? What does it indicate, this succession of heroes on the stage? For thus far they have been its heroes, and everything else that is alone visible and in the limelight for a time has only served to set the stage for these heroes, whether as theatrical machinery and backdrop, or in the role of confidants and valets. (The poets, for example, have always been the valets of some morality or other.)<br>
<br>
It goes without saying that these tragedians also work in the interest of our species, even though they may believe themselves to be promoting the interest of God and serving as His emissaries. They also contribute to the life of the race by encouraging belief in life. ‘Life is worth living’ – they all cry – ‘there is something about this life, something behind and beneath it: beware!’ That impulse, which prevails in the highest and the basest alike, the impulse to preservation, breaks forth from time to time as reason and intellectual passion; it has about it then a brilliant host of reasons, and tries with all its might to make us forget that at bottom it is impulse, instinct, folly and baselessness. Life should be loved, because! Man should help himself and his neighbour, because! And what do all these ‘shoulds’ and ‘becauses’ mean, and what might they mean in the future! In order that whatever happens, necessarily and always, of its own accord and without purpose, may from now on appear to be done on purpose, and may be intelligible to men as rational and obligatory – to that end, the ethical teacher arises who teaches the purpose of life; to that end, he devises a second and different life, and by means of this new mechanism he lifts the old common life off its old common hinges. He certainly does not want us to laugh at life, at ourselves – or at him; to him an individual is always an individual, something first and last and tremendous, to him there are no species, no sums, no zeroes. However foolish and rapturous his inventions and enthusiasms may be, however much he may misunderstand the course of nature and deny its conditions – and all systems of ethics hitherto have been foolish and unnatural to such a degree that if any of them had taken possession of mankind, we would have perished – nevertheless! Whenever ‘the hero’ appeared on the stage, something new was achieved, the thrilling counterpart of laughter, the profound shock of many individuals at the thought: ‘Yes, life is worth living! I am worthy of living!’ Life and you and I and all of us together once again became interesting to us for a while.<br>
<br>
There is no denying that in the long run every one of these great teachers of purpose so far has been overcome by laughter and reason and nature: in the end the brief tragedy always turned and returned to the eternal comedy of life; and the ‘waves of countless laughter’1 – to speak with Aeschylus – must eventually shipwreck even the greatest of these tragedians. Notwithstanding all this laughter serving as a corrective, human nature has been wholly transformed by the endless procession of those teachers of the purpose of life – human nature now has a further need, precisely the need for an endless procession of such teachers and doctrines of ‘purpose’. Man has gradually become a fanciful animal, who has one more condition of existence to fulfil than other animals: from time to time, man must think he knows why he exists; the human race cannot flourish without periodically renewed trust in life! Without believing in the reason in life! And again and again humankind will decree from time to time: ‘There is something at which you are henceforth absolutely forbidden to laugh!’ And the canniest philanthropist will add: ‘not only laughter and joyous wisdom, but also the tragic with all its sublime unreasonableness are among the necessities and means of preservation!’<br>
<br>
And consequently! Consequently! Consequently! Do you understand me, my brothers? Do you understand this new law of ebb and flow? Our time will come!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 5: *Unconditional Obligations*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
All people who feel that they need the strongest words and tones, the most eloquent gestures and attitudes, in order to be effective at all, revolutionary politicians, socialists, preachers with or without Christianity, for whom there must be no merely partial success: all these speak of ‘obligations’, and indeed, always of obligations which have the character of being unconditional – without such they would have no right to their great pathos: that they know full well! So they seize upon philosophies of morality, preach some kind of categorical imperative, or help themselves to a good slice of religion, as, for example, Mazzini did. Because they want to be trusted implicitly, it is first of all necessary for them to trust themselves, on the basis of some ultimate, incontrovertible, intrinsically sublime authority whose minister and instrument they would like to impersonate and feel themselves to be. Here we have the most natural, and often very influential, opponents of moral enlightenment and scepticism; but they are rare. On the other hand, there is a very extensive class of opponents wherever interest teaches subjection, while reputation and honour seem to forbid it. Anyone who feels dishonoured at the thought of being the instrument of a prince, or of a party and sect, or even of a moneyed power, for example the descendant of a proud, old family, but who now wishes to be or must be seen to be an instrument, in his own eyes and in the eyes of the public, has need of lofty principles which may at any time be pronounced – principles of an unconditional ‘shalt’ to which one may without shame bow down and make a display of subservience. A finer servility adheres to the categorical imperative, and is the mortal enemy of those who want to deprive obligation of its unconditional character: the dignity of their position requires this of them, and not only that of their position.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 12: *Of the Purpose of Science*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
How is that? The ultimate purpose of science is to give people as much pleasure and as little pain as possible? But suppose that pleasure and pain are so intertwined that whoever wants as much as possible of the one must also have as much as possible of the other – that whoever wants to know ‘rejoicing to heaven’ must be prepared for ‘grieving unto death’ as well? And such might be the case! At least so the Stoics believed, who were consistent when they sought as little pleasure as possible, that life might afford them as little pain as possible. (With the adage ‘those who are virtuous are the happiest’ on their lips, the school had both a billboard for the great unwashed, as well as a piece of casuistry for the subtle.) Even today you have a choice: either as little pain as possible, in short, analgesia – and in the end, socialists and party politicians cannot in all honesty promise their people more – or as much pain as possible, as the price of a luxuriance of subtle and seldom-tasted joys and pleasures! Should you decide in favour of the former, should you want to mitigate and assuage human suffering, well, you must also moderate and diminish the human capacity for joy. In fact, science can serve the one purpose as well as the other! Perhaps it is still better known on account of its power to kill a man’s joys and make him colder, more statue-like, more Stoical. But it might also be revealed as the great woe-bearer! And then perhaps at the same time would its opposing force be revealed, its prodigious power to light up new starry worlds of joy!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 13: *On the Theory of the Sense of Power*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
In doing others well or ill, we want no more than to exert power over them! In doing ill, we hurt those to whom we need to make our power palpable, for pain is a much more striking way to do so than pleasure – pain always casts about for its cause, while pleasure is inclined to look no further than itself. In doing well and wishing well, we help those who somehow or other already depend upon us (that is, who are accustomed to regard us as the cause of their existence); we want to increase their power, because in so doing we increase our own; or we want show them the advantages of being in our power – so they will be more satisfied with their position, and assume a more threatening and hostile aspect against the enemies of our power. It does not alter the final value of our actions if we make sacrifices to do well or ill; even if we lay down our lives like martyrs for the sake of our Church, it is a sacrifice made to our desire for power, or for the purpose of preserving our sense of power. Whoever has the feeling that says, ‘I am in possession of the truth’, how many other possessions would he not gladly forgo to retain it? What would he not jettison to keep ‘above’ water – or should I say, above others who lack the ‘truth’! Certainly, doing ill is seldom so agreeable, so purely agreeable, as doing well; it indicates that we still lack power, or betrays that we are vexed at this privation; it exposes us to new dangers and uncertainties which threaten the power we already possess, and darkens our horizon with the prospect of revenge, scorn, punishment and failure. Only he who is most covetous of the sense of power and most susceptible to its charms, for whom the sight of an object of benevolence, that is, the already subjugated, has become tedious and burdensome, might find it more pleasurable to stamp the seal of power on more refractory material. It depends on how we are accustomed to give spice to life; it is a matter of taste whether we prefer a slow but sure growth of power to a sudden, dangerous and daring one – we always relish this or that spice, each according to his temperament. To proud natures, an easy prey is something contemptible; they have a sense of well-being only at the sight of an untamed man who could be an enemy, just as they do at the sight of anything difficult to acquire; they are often hard towards those who suffer as not worthy of them or their efforts – but they show themselves to be more obliging towards their equals, with whom strife and struggle would at least be honourable, should the occasion present itself. Imbued with the sense of well-being engendered by this perspective, the men of the knightly caste have accustomed themselves to an exquisite courtesy to one another.

Pity is the most agreeable sensation in those who have little pride and no prospect of great conquests: for them, easy prey – and that is what all who suffer are – is something enchanting. Pity is the much-vaunted virtue of whores.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 15: *From a Distance*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
This mountain makes the whole landscape it dominates pregnant with meaning and attractive in every way: after saying this to ourselves for the hundredth time, our appreciation becomes so extravagant and unwarranted that we imagine the source of this attraction to be the most attractive thing in the landscape – and so we climb the mountain and are disappointed. All of a sudden we become disenchanted both with it and with the landscape around and below us; we had forgotten that much greatness, like much goodness, wants to be seen only at a certain distance, and by all means from below, not from above – only in this way is it effective. Perhaps you know some people around you who can only look at themselves from a certain distance to find themselves at all tolerable or pleasing to behold and thus fortify themselves; for them, self-knowledge is ill-advised.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 21: *To the Teachers of Unselfishness*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The virtues of a man are called good, not with regard to the results they have for himself, but those we expect for ourselves and for society – all along there has been very little of the unselfish, very little of the ‘unegoistic’ in our praise of the virtues! For otherwise one could not help but see that the virtues (such as diligence, obedience, chastity, piety, justice) are mostly bad for their possessors, who are too much governed by these intensely ardent impulses, impulses which refuse to be put in balance with other impulses by reason. When you have a virtue, a real and complete virtue (and not merely a slight inclination towards virtue!), you are sacrificed to it! But your neighbour praises your virtue for that very reason! We praise the diligent man even though he ruins his eyes, or his mind loses its freshness and originality. We honour a youth while regretting the fact that he ‘worked his fingers to the bone’, because we judge: ‘For society as a whole, even the loss of the best individual is but a small sacrifice! What a pity that sacrifice is needed! Much worse, however, should the individual think otherwise, and regard his own preservation and development as more important than his service to society.’ And so we deplore the fate of this youth, not on his own account, but because a humble instrument – a so-called ‘good man’ – through wanton self-neglect has died and been lost to society. We might perhaps consider whether it would not have been more useful to society if he had worked with less self-neglect, and preserved himself longer – of course we readily admit the advantage in that, but reply that the other advantage – namely that a sacrifice has been made, and that our attitude towards, and treatment of, the sacrificial animal has once again been conspicuously confirmed – is more important and makes a more lasting impression. Therefore when virtue is praised, what is actually being praised is at once the instrumental character of the virtues, and then the blind impulse which governs every virtue and which cannot be reined in by regard for the larger interests of the individual himself: in short, the unreasonableness in virtue whereby the individual allows himself to be converted into a function of the larger whole. The praise of virtue is the praise of some private harm – it is praise of impulses which deprive a man of his noblest selfishness, and the strength to take the greatest care of himself.<br>
<br>
To be sure: we make much of a wide range of effects of virtue, the better to promote the inculcation of virtuous habits, conveying the impression that public virtue and private advantage go hand in hand – and in fact there is a kinship between them! For example, we represent blind and vehement diligence, the typical virtue of an instrument, as the road to wealth and honour and as a most salutary antidote to tedium and the passions; but we omit mentioning the grave danger of it. For this is how inculcation of virtue invariably proceeds: by a variety of stimuli and advantages we seek to induce in the individual a particular way of thinking and acting. Once it has become habit, impulse and passion, it rules in him and over him ‘for the common good’, but ultimately to his own detriment. How often have I observed that a man’s blind and vehement diligence does indeed create wealth and confer honour, only to deprive him of the refinement he needs to enjoy them. Thus the principal remedy for tedium and passion simultaneously dulls the senses and renders the intellect averse to new stimuli! (The most diligent of all ages – our age – can do nothing with its great diligence and money, except make even more money, and exercise even more diligence; for it requires more genius to spend than to acquire! Well, there are always our ‘grandchildren’!) If the inculcation of virtue is successful, every virtue is useful to the public while putting the individual who has it at a private disadvantage – probably some mental atrophy or even an early demise – with respect to his highest aims; consider in this light, one by one, the virtues of obedience, chastity, piety and justice. The praise of the unselfish, self-sacrificing, virtuous person – who therefore does not expend his whole energy and reason for his own preservation, development, ennoblement, advancement and extension of power, but who leads a humble and thoughtless life, perhaps even an indifferent or ironical one – in any case, this praise is not born of the spirit of unselfishness! The ‘neighbour’ praises unselfishness because it redounds to his own advantage! Were the neighbour’s own intentions ‘unselfish’, he would reject this impairment of strength, this injury to others on his behalf, he would counteract such tendencies as they emerge, and above all he would show his unselfishness by the very fact of not calling them good!<br>
<br>
Here we see the fundamental contradiction in the morality now held in high regard: its motives are opposed to its principle! The benefit to others with which this morality wants to demonstrate its worth is belied by its own criterion of morality! The injunction ‘You shall renounce yourself and offer yourself as a sacrifice’, lest it contradict its own morality, could only be decreed by a being who had renounced his own advantage and who, in the individual self-sacrifice required, perhaps even brought about his own demise. However, as soon as the neighbour (or society) exhorts us to altruism on account of its utility, the very opposite proposition, ‘You shall pursue your advantage even at everyone else’s expense’, applies; and therefore ‘thou shalt’ and ‘thou shalt not’ are preached in the same breath!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 23: *The Signs of Corruption*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Consider the following signs of that occasionally necessary condition of society called ‘corruption’. As soon as corruption sets in anywhere, a motley array of superstitions becomes prevalent, and the earlier shared faith of a people becomes pale and powerless against it; however, superstition is a lesser species of free-thinking – he who gives himself over to it selects certain congenial forms and formulae and exercises some discretion in doing so. Compared to the religious man, the superstitious man is always much more of a ‘person’, and a superstitious society is one in which there are already more individuals and more delight in individuality. Seen from this standpoint, superstition is always an advance upon faith and a sign of the intellect becoming independent and asserting its rights. The devotees of the ancient religion and its religiosity complain then about corruption – until now they have determined linguistic usage, and have brought superstition into ill-repute even among the freest of free-thinkers. Let us learn that it is a symptom of enlightenment.<br>
<br>
Second, a society in which corruption takes place is charged with a lack of moral fibre: its approval of and delight in war perceptibly diminish, and the comforts of life are now as ardently sought after as athletic and military honours had once been. But it is customary to overlook the fact that the old passion and energy of the people, which became splendidly conspicuous through sport and war, has now transformed itself into a multitude of private passions, and has only become less conspicuous. Indeed, the force and violence with which a ‘corrupt’ people expends energy is probably greater than ever; the individual squanders his own as never before – in the past, he could ill afford to do so. And so the times that ‘lack moral fibre’ are precisely those in which great love and great hatred are born, tragedy spreads from house to house and knowledge is set ablaze, its flame rising into the sky.<br>
<br>
Third, as if to compensate for blaming corrupt times for their superstition and lack of moral fibre, it is customary to say that they are milder, and much less cruel when measured against the older, stronger, more credulous period. But I can no more agree with the praise than the blame: I will go so far as to admit that cruelty has become refined, and that its older forms are considered distasteful; but in such times the art of wounding with a word or a look attains perfection – it is only now that malice is created, and the delight in malice. The men are men of wit and slander, who know that ambush and dagger are not the only ways to kill – and that eloquence is always taken for truth.<br>
<br>
Fourth, when ‘morals decline’, we see for the first time that peculiar being called the ‘tyrant’: he is the progenitor of the individuals, and, as it were, their harvest’s unseasonable first fruit. A little while longer and this fruit of fruits hangs ripe and yellow on the tree of a people – and this tree stood only for the sake of these fruits! When morals descend to their nadir, and civil war between the various tyrants is brought to a head, a last tyrant and Caesar always comes to put an end to the exhausting struggle for autocratic rule, by turning exhaustion to his advantage. This is when individuals are usually at their most mature, and consequently ‘culture’ is at its height and at its most fruitful, but not for the tyrant’s sake and surely no thanks to him, even if the most cultured men love to flatter their Caesar by pretending that he made them. But the truth is, they need rest from the outside, because they have their restlessness and labour on the inside. Now bribery and treason are at their greatest, for love of the recently discovered ego proves more powerful than love of the old, worn-out, talked-to-death ‘fatherland’; and the need to secure oneself somehow against the terrible reverses of fortune opens even the nobler hands, once a richer and more powerful man shows himself ready to pour gold into them. The future is now quite uncertain; everyone lives for today, a state of mind in which the game of graft and swindle is played with ease – that is, it is only ‘for today’ that they allow themselves to be bribed and bought, while tomorrow and tomorrow’s virtue they reserve to themselves! It is a well-known fact that individuals, being truly things apart, care more for the moment than their opposites the gregarious do, because they consider themselves as unpredictable as the future; likewise, they readily take up with the violent, because the crowd could neither understand nor condone the actions to which they dare have recourse – but the tyrant or Caesar understands that the individual has a right even to his excesses, and has an interest in advocating a bolder private morality, and even in lending it a hand. For what he thinks of himself, and what he wants others to think of him, is what Napoleon in his classical manner at one time declared: ‘I have the right to answer any complaint against me with an eternal “this is what I am”. I stand aloof from the whole world and accept conditions from no one. I want submission even to my fancies and regard it as a matter of course that I indulge myself in this or that diversion.’ Napoleon once spoke thus to his wife, who had reasons to question her husband’s fidelity.<br>
<br>
It is during the most corrupt times that these apples ripen and fall, by which I mean the individuals who bear the seeds of the future, the intellectual pioneers and founders of causes and federations. Corruption is only an ugly word for the autumn of a people.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 24: *Various Discontents*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The weak and, as it were, feminine, among the discontented, display considerable ingenuity in making life beautiful and profound; the strong ones – the masculine among the discontented, to continue the metaphor – display their ingenuity in securing and improving it. On occasion, the former, out of weakness, and as women are wont to do, readily allow themselves to be deceived, and perhaps even content themselves with a little ecstasy and enthusiasm at times, but on the whole are never satisfied, and suffer from an incurable discontent. Moreover, they promote all who are adept at providing opiate-like and narcotic consolations, and for that reason bear a grudge against those who appreciate the physician more than the priest – thereby prolonging the real distress! Had there not been too many of this sort in Europe since the Middle Ages, perhaps Europeans’ remarkable aptitude for constant transformation would not have arisen at all; for the requirements of the strong among the discontented are too broad, and at bottom too simple, not to be rendered quiescent in the end. China is an example of a country in which considerable discontent and the aptitude for transformation died out centuries ago; and Europe’s socialists and those who worship the idol of the state could easily bring about Chinese conditions and a Chinese ‘happiness’, what with all their measures for securing and improving life, provided that they first eradicate the more sickly, more delicate, more feminine discontent and romanticism which is, for the time being, still present in abundance. Europe is an incurable invalid who owes the deepest gratitude to her sufferings and all their endless transformations; these ever-new circumstances, and likewise these ever-new pains, dangers and expedients, have in the end produced an intellectual fractiousness tantamount to genius, or which in any event is the mother of all genius.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 28: *Doing Harm with Their Best*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Our strengths sometimes impel us so far ahead of ourselves that we cannot any longer bear our weaknesses, and we perish by them; we perhaps even anticipate this outcome, and would not have it otherwise. Then we become hard with those qualities in us that want to be spared, and our greatness is also our ruthlessness.<br>
<br>
Such an experience, which must in the end cost us our lives, is a parable of the whole effect great men have on others and on their time – it is precisely with their best qualities and singular abilities that they ruin much that is uncertain, unfinished, weak and wanting, and are thus harmful. Indeed, all things considered, it may seem that they only do harm, because their best is accepted, imbibed like strong drink, only by those who as a result lose all prudence and reason; and in the end they break their legs, stumbling on all the wrong tracks down which their intoxication impels them.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 31: *Commerce and Nobility*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Buying and selling are now as common as the arts of reading and writing; now all are well practised in these arts even if they are not themselves merchants who practise them daily, just as formerly, in the age of savagery, everyone was a hunter, and day after day practised that art. At the time, hunting was common; but just as this became a privilege of the noble and powerful, and in the end lost the ordinary tone of everyday life – ceasing to be necessary and becoming a matter of whim and luxury – so might it be some day with buying and selling. Social conditions in which there is no buying and selling, in which the need for these arts is gradually lost, are entirely conceivable; perhaps individuals less subject to the rigours of the general condition will, at their own discretion, engage in buying and selling as a sentimental luxury. Only then would commerce be ennobled, and only then would the nobility perhaps want to concern itself with it, as it has hitherto concerned itself with war and politics; conversely, the esteem in which politics is held might have completely changed by then. Politics has already ceased to be the business of a gentleman; and it is possible that one day it may be regarded as so common, like writing for a party or for the dailies, as to fall under the rubric ‘intellectual prostitution’.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 35: *Heresy and Witchcraft*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Thinking other than is customary – that is not nearly so much the effect of a better intellect as it is of strong, evil tendencies, of antisocial, reclusive, defiant, spiteful and malicious tendencies. Heresy is the counterpart of witchcraft, and, like witchcraft, is surely by no means innocuous, much less something worthy of reverence. Heretics and witches are both people of an evil sort: what they share is that they also feel themselves to be evil, but that they cannot resist the desire to do harm to the dominant men and prevailing opinions. The Reformation, during which the medieval mind redoubled its efforts, albeit without its former good conscience, yielded both in the greatest abundance.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 37: *Owing to Three Errors*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Science has been promoted in the last few centuries, partly in the hope of understanding God’s goodness and wisdom with and by it – the chief motive of great English minds (like Newton) – partly from a belief in the absolute utility of knowledge, and especially the belief that morality, knowledge and happiness stand in the closest connection with one another – the chief motive of great French minds (like Voltaire) – partly because loving and possessing science was thought to be sufficient unto itself, selfless, innocuous and entirely innocent, a passion in which people’s evil impulses played no role – Spinoza’s chief motive, who as a knowledge-seeker felt himself to be divine: that is, owing to three errors.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 40: *Of the Absence of Noble Demeanour*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Soldiers and their leaders always comport themselves towards one another in a loftier manner than workers and their employers. At least for the time being, culture with a military basis still stands high above all so-called industrial culture which, as presently constituted, is unquestionably the most debased form of life that ever was. Here, everything is determined by sheer need: workers want to live and have to sell themselves, but despise him who exploits this need and buys them. It is curious that submission to powerful, awe-inspiring and even terrible individuals, to tyrants and generals, is felt far less acutely than submission to such generic bores as our captains of industry: in the employer, workers usually see nothing but a sly dog who feeds on the misery of others, whose name, stature, character and reputation are a matter of perfect indifference to him. It is probable that in all those forms and insignia of a superior race which alone make a person interesting, industrialists and commercial magnates have thus far been woefully deficient; had they the distinction of noble birth in their look and bearing, there might not be any interest in socialism among the masses. For fundamentally the masses are ready for slavery of any kind, provided that their betters are unfailingly legitimized as superior and born to command – by their noble demeanour! The common man feels that nobility is not to be improvised, and that he has to honour it as the fruit of a long development – but the absence of superior demeanour, and the blatant vulgarity of grubby-handed industrialists, gives rise to the thought that only luck has placed one above the other. ‘Well then,’ he reasons to himself, ‘for once let us try our luck! For once let us throw the dice!’ And then you have socialism.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 42: *Work and Tedium*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Seeking work for the sake of the wages – in the civilized world today almost everybody does that. Work has become a means, not an end, which is why people are not very discerning in their choice of employment as long as they are amply rewarded. Now there are those rare few who would rather die than work without taking pleasure in it, people who are particular and hard to please, who are not served by an ample reward if the work itself is not rewarding. This rare breed includes all manner of artists and contemplatives, but also men of leisure who spend their lives hunting and travelling, or in love affairs and adventures. All of them will endure toil and hardship if it is associated with pleasure, and the heaviest, hardest toil, if need be. But otherwise, they are resolutely idle, even if this idleness goes hand in hand with poverty, disgrace and danger to life and limb. It is not tedium they fear so much as work without pleasure: they even need a fair amount of tedium, if their own work is to succeed. For the thinker, and for any inventive genius, tedium is that disconcerting state of a soul ‘becalmed’ which precedes the happy voyage and fair winds; he must bear it and await its effect on him – it is precisely this which lesser natures cannot quite manage! To dispel tedium by any means necessary is uncouth, just as working without pleasure is uncouth. The Asiatics are perhaps distinguished from the Europeans by their capacity for a longer and deeper calm; even their narcotics take effect slowly and require patience, in contrast with the appalling rapidity of the European poison, alcohol.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 43: *Laws and What They Betray*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
One errs greatly in the study of a people’s criminal laws, if one regards them as an expression of its character; the laws do not betray who they are, but rather what seems foreign, alien, monstrous and strange to them. The laws pertain to deviations from their traditional ethos, and the severest penalties fall on that which is in accord with the traditions of neighbouring peoples. The Wahhabi have only two mortal sins: having a god other than the Wahhabi god, and – smoking (which they refer to as ‘the disgraceful kind of drinking’). On learning these things, an astonished Englishman once asked, ‘And what about murder and adultery?’ ‘Well, God is gracious and merciful,’ the old chief replied.<br>
<br>
The ancient Romans were of the opinion that there were only two mortal sins for a woman: committing adultery and – drinking wine. Old Cato believed that the only reason for the tradition of kissing between relatives was to keep women under control in this regard; a kiss meant ‘Was the smell of wine on her breath?’ Women who were caught drinking wine were actually put to death; and certainly not just because under its influence women sometimes forget how to say ‘no’; above all else, the Romans feared something by which the women of the European South who were then new to wine were occasionally beset, something of an orgiastic and Dionysian nature, something foreign and monstrous that offended Roman sensibilities; to them it seemed a betrayal of Rome, the incorporation of what was foreign.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 48: *Knowledge of Hardship*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Perhaps nothing separates men and eras from one another quite so much as the extent of their knowledge of hardship, mental as well as physical. With respect to the latter, it may be that our contemporaries are all amateurs who, lacking sufficient first-hand experience, must rely on conjecture, their frailties and infirmities notwithstanding. By contrast, those who lived in the age of fear – the longest of all ages – had to protect themselves from violence, and to that end had to be violent themselves. In those days, a man received a long schooling in bodily pain and privation, in the knowledge that even a certain cruelty towards himself, a willingness to suffer, was necessary for his preservation; in those days, a person gave his companions an education in enduring pain, inflicting it quite readily, and when he saw the most terrible things of this kind happen to others, he felt nothing but his own safety. Where mental hardship is concerned, I now look at every man to see if he knows it by experience or by description; if he still considers it necessary to feign this knowledge, as a mark of refinement, say; or if deep down in his heart he does not believe in mental sufferings at all, and is the same at the mention of them as at the mention of great physical ordeals, which bring to mind his toothaches and stomachaches. So it seems to me with most people these days. The fact that so few have experienced pain of either kind, and that the sight of suffering has become comparatively rare, has important consequences: pain is considered more hateful and arouses more indignation than ever before; indeed, the mere thought of pain is considered almost unbearable, a source of moral anxiety and a reproach to the whole of existence. The emergence of pessimistic philosophies is by no means a sign of some great and terrible distress; rather, these question marks regarding the worth of life arise when the human condition has been so improved and ameliorated that the inevitable mosquito bites of body and soul are found to be altogether too gruesome and gory, and in the poverty of their experience of actual pain, people will even take being troubled by ideas to be suffering of the highest order.<br>
<br>
There is already a remedy for pessimistic philosophies and the squeamishness which seems to me our real hardship, the real ‘crying need of the hour’ – but perhaps this remedy sounds too cruel, and would itself be reckoned among the signs on the basis of which one now proclaims: ‘existence is evil’. Well then! The remedy for this ‘hardship’ is: hardship.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 54: *The Consciousness of Appearances*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Knowing what I know, how wonderful and new, and yet how disturbing and ironic my situation is with respect to the whole of existence! I have discovered first-hand that human and animal nature, indeed the whole history and prehistory of feeling within me, continues to love, hate, concoct and conclude – I have suddenly awakened in the middle of this dream, but only to the consciousness of dreaming, and that I must continue to dream lest I perish, just as the sleepwalker must continue to dream lest he slip and fall. What is ‘appearance’ to me now! Surely not what is in opposition to some essence – what can I attribute to any essence other than the predicates of its appearance! Surely not a dead mask that conceals the face of some unknown variable, and which might well be torn off it! To me, appearance itself is alive and effective, and it goes so far in its self-mockery as to give the impression that it is appearance and will-o’-the-wisp and dance of spirits and nothing more – and that I too among all these dreamers, I the ‘knowledge-seeker’, also dance my dance, that the knowledge-seeker is a means of prolonging this worldly dance, and is to that extent one of the stewards of life’s festival, and that the sublime consistency and consilience of all that we know is perhaps the best means of preserving the community of reverie, preserving the perfect intelligibility of all the dreamers to one another, and in so doing preserving the continuity of the dream.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 56: *The Desire for Suffering*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
When I think of the desire to do something, how it constantly arouses and incites millions of young Europeans who can endure neither their boredom nor themselves, then I realize that they must harbour a desire to suffer, and to draw from their suffering a plausible reason for action, for deeds. Absence of hardship is the real hardship! Hence the political demagoguery, hence the many false, imaginary, exaggerated ‘crises’ of every possible variety, and the blind willingness to believe in them. The world of youth demands that unhappiness, not happiness, should come or be visible from without; from the very beginning their imaginations are busily making a dragon out of it so that in the end they might slay it. If these youths with their addiction to hardship had the strength to do themselves some good, to draw upon their inner resources, they would also know how to create hardships of their very own. Then what they imagine might be more subtle, and what gratifies them more melodious; whereas now they fill the world with their outrage about hardship, and hence all too often with the sense of hardship in the first place! They do not know what to do with themselves – and so they make a mural of others’ unhappiness; they always need others! And always other others! Pardon me, my friends, I have ventured to make a mural of my happiness.
</i></p>

## Book II
### Aphorism 64: *Sceptics*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
I am afraid that women who have grown old are more sceptical in the secret recesses of their hearts than any man; they believe in the superficiality of existence as in its essence, and to them all virtue and profundity is merely a veil over this ‘truth’, a very desirable veil over a pudendum – thus a matter of decency and modesty, and nothing more!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 66: *The Strength of the Weak*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
All women are adept at exaggerating their weaknesses, indeed they are inventive in weakness, in order to appear as utterly fragile ornaments to which even a speck of dust does harm; their very existence is supposed to make man acutely aware of his heavy-handedness, and to make him feel guilty about it. Thus do they defend themselves against the strong and the ‘law of the jungle’.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 68: *Will and Willingness*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Someone brought a youth to a wise man and said, ‘Look, this one is being corrupted by women!’ The wise man shook his head and smiled. ‘It is men’, he exclaimed, ‘who corrupt women; and everything that women lack should be atoned for and reformed by men – because it is man who creates for himself the image of woman, and woman moulds herself according to this image.’ ‘You are too sympathetic towards women,’ said one of the bystanders, ‘you do not know them!’ The wise man answered, ‘Man’s nature is will, woman’s is willingness – such is the law of the sexes, truly a hard law for woman! All human beings are innocent of its existence, women, however, are doubly innocent; who could have enough balm and sympathy for them!’ ‘What balm! What sympathy!’ someone else in the crowd exclaimed, ‘Women need to be better educated!’ ‘Men need to be better educated,’ said the wise man, and made a sign to the youth to follow him.<br>
<br>
The youth, however, did not follow him.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 83: *Translations*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
One can estimate the degree to which an age possesses the historical sense by how it makes translations and seeks to annex past periods and literatures. The French of Corneille, and even the French of the Revolution, appropriated Roman antiquity in a manner for which we no longer have the courage – owing to our superior historical sense. And Roman antiquity itself: how violently, and at the same time how naively, did it lay hands on everything good and superior belonging to the more ancient antiquity of Greece! How they translated it all into the Roman present! How they deliberately and recklessly brushed away the dust from that moment, like brushing away the dust from the wings of a butterfly! This was how Horace occasionally translated Alcaeus or Archilochus, how Propertius translated Callimachus and Philetas (poets of equal rank with Theocritus, if we may be allowed to judge); what was it to them that the actual creator had had certain experiences, and had given indications of them in his poem! As poets, they were averse to the antiquarian, investigative spirit which precedes the historical sense; as poets, they rejected these entirely personal matters and names, and everything unique about the costume and mask of a city, a coast or a century, and instead immediately substituted the present and the Roman. They seem to be asking us, ‘Should we not remake the old for our own benefit, and put ourselves into it? Should we not be allowed to breathe our soul into this lifeless body? For it is lifeless, after all; how ugly are all things lifeless.’ They did not know the pleasures of the historical sense; the past and the foreign made them uncomfortable, and, being Romans, this was sufficient motive for a Roman conquest. In fact, they conquered when they translated – not only in that they omitted the historical: no, they also added allusions to the present, and above all struck out the name of the poet and put their own in its place – without any feeling of being a thief, but with the very best conscience of the imperium Romanum.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 98: *In Praise of Shakespeare*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The most beautiful thing I could say in praise of Shakespeare, in praise of the man, is that he believed in Brutus, and cast not a shadow of doubt on this kind of virtue! It is to him that Shakespeare dedicated his best tragedy – it is still called by the wrong name – to him, and to the most formidable epitome of a superior morality. Independence of soul! That is what is at issue here! For this, no sacrifice can be too great; for its sake, we must be willing to sacrifice even our dearest friend, even if he is the most magnificent of men, the ornament of the world, a genius without peer – when we actually love freedom as great souls love freedom, and this freedom is put at risk by such a man, this is what we must do – but this must be what Shakespeare himself felt! The height at which he placed Caesar was the finest honour he could possibly bestow on Brutus; it is only in this way that he was able to increase the magnitude of Brutus’ inner problem to immense proportions and likewise increase the magnitude of the inner strength required to cut this knot!<br>
<br>
And was it really political freedom which drove the poet to sympathy with Brutus – and made him into his accomplice? Or was political freedom merely a symbol for something inexpressible? Do we perhaps stand before some obscure and as yet unknown event or adventure within the poet’s own soul, of which he preferred to speak in signs? What is all of Hamlet’s melancholy compared to the melancholy of Brutus! And perhaps Shakespeare also knew this, as he knew the other, from experience! Perhaps he too had his dark hour and his evil angel, just like Brutus!<br>
<br>
But whatever similarities and hidden allusions there may have been, Shakespeare abased himself before the whole figure of the man, finding such virtue inaccessible to him and feeling himself unworthy by contrast – the evidence for this being written into the tragedy itself. Twice he presents a poet, and twice he heaps upon him such impatient and extreme contempt that it sounds like a cry – a cry of self-contempt. Brutus, even Brutus loses his patience when the poet appears, self-important, pathetic and importunate, as poets tend to be – creatures who seem to be full of possibilities for greatness, even for moral greatness, and yet whose ethics and conduct rarely rise even to the level of common decency. ‘I’ll know his humours when he knows his time – jigging fool, hence!’ shouts Brutus. We should translate this back into the soul of the poet who wrote it.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 99: *Schopenhauer’s Followers*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
When barbarians come into contact with civilized peoples, invariably the more primitive culture will adopt the vices, weaknesses and excesses of the more advanced culture first. From that point onwards, the former feels the attraction exerted by the latter, and eventually, by way of the vices and excesses it has appropriated, allows something of the more valuable powers of the latter to influence it as well. The opportunity to observe this sort of thing may also be had without expeditions to the lands of barbaric peoples, though in a refined, intellectualized and far less palpable form. Consider Schopenhauer’s followers in Germany. These were men who, when comparing themselves to him and his superior culture, must have felt barbaric enough to be fascinated and seduced by him from the very beginning. What, then, did they accept from their master first? Was it his tough-mindedness, his determination to be clear and rational, which often made him seem so very English, and so little German? Or was it the strength of his intellectual conscience, which endured a lifelong contradiction between what he was and what he wished to be and which compelled him constantly to contradict himself on almost every point, even in his writings? Or was it his scrupulousness in matters of the Church and of the Christian God? For here he was scrupulous as no German philosopher had ever been before; he lived and died ‘as a Voltairian’. Or was it his immortal doctrines of the intellectuality of intuition, the a priori character of the law of causality, the instrumental nature of the intellect, and the non-existence of free will? No, none of this is considered fascinating; but Schopenhauer’s mystical embarrassments and evasions in those passages where the tough-minded thinker allowed himself to be seduced and corrupted by the vain impulse to be the unriddler of the world, these were considered fascinating: the unprovable theory of the one will (‘all causes are only the occasional causes for the appearance of this will at this time, in this place’, ‘the will to life is present in every being, even the slightest, wholly and undivided, as completely as in all beings that ever were, and will be taken together’); the denial of the individual (‘all lions are at bottom only one lion’, ‘the multiplicity of individuals is an illusion’, the assertion that development too is only an illusion – he calls Lamarck’s idea ‘an ingenious, absurd error’); the ravings about genius (‘in aesthetic intuition the individual is no longer an individual; he is a pure, will-less, painless, timeless subject of cognition’, ‘the subject, being entirely absorbed into the intuited object, becomes this object itself’); the nonsense about pity, how it facilitates the breaching of the principii individuationis which is the source of all morality; additionally, such assertions as ‘dying is certainly to be seen as the true purpose of existence’, ‘the possibility cannot outright be denied a priori that a magical effect might not also come from somebody already dead’ – these and similar excesses and vices of the philosopher were always accepted first and made articles of faith; for vices and excesses are always the easiest to imitate, and do not require any extensive prior training. But let us speak of the most famous of the living Schopenhauerians, Richard Wagner.<br>
<br>
What happened to him had already happened to many an artist: he erred in the interpretation of the characters he had created, and misunderstood the implicit philosophy of his own art. For half of his life, Richard Wagner allowed himself to be misled by Hegel; he did the same thing again when he later interpreted his characters in terms of Schopenhauer’s doctrine, and began to speak in terms of ‘will’, ‘genius’ and ‘pity’. Nevertheless, the truth remains that nothing is more contrary to Schopenhauer’s spirit than the genuinely Wagnerian element in Wagner’s heroes, by which I mean the innocence of the most supreme selfishness, the belief that great passion is inherently good – in a word, the Siegfried quality in the countenances of his heroes. ‘All of this smacks more of Spinoza than of me,’ Schopenhauer might have said. Now, however advisable it may have been for Wagner to seek elsewhere than in Schopenhauer for philosophical guidance, the fascination to which he succumbed with regard to this thinker blinded him not only to all other philosophers, but even to science itself; increasingly, he wanted his entire art to be the counterpart and complement of the Schopenhauerian philosophy, while emphatically renouncing the nobler ambition of becoming the counterpart and complement of human knowledge and science. And not only was he tempted to do so by the whole mysterious pomp of this philosophy (which would have also tempted a Cagliostro); the peculiar gestures and emotions of the philosophers had also been seducing him all along! For example, Wagner’s sputtering about the corruption of the German language is Schopenhauerian; and while his imitation in this regard is commendable, it cannot be denied that Wagner’s own style suffers in no small degree from the very blemishes and turgidities, the sight of which so infuriated Schopenhauer; and that with respect to the Wagnerians writing in German, Wagnerizing is beginning to prove as dangerous as any kind of Hegelizing ever did. Wagner’s hatred of the Jews, to whom he cannot do justice even with regard to their greatest achievement – for it is the Jews who are the inventors of Christianity – is Schopenhauerian. Wagner’s attempt to regard Christianity as having sprung from a seed of Buddhism carried by the wind, and to prepare the way for a Buddhist era in Europe by a temporary rapprochement with Catholic and Christian formulae and sentiments, are both Schopenhauerian. Wagner’s preaching in favour of mercy in our dealing with animals is Schopenhauerian; Schopenhauer’s well-known predecessor here was Voltaire, who perhaps even like his successors knew how to disguise his hatred of certain things and people as mercy towards animals. At least Wagner’s hatred of science, which is manifest in this preaching, is certainly not inspired by any thoughts of tenderness and kindness – nor, it goes without saying, by anything resembling thinking at all.<br>
<br>
Ultimately the philosophy an artist espouses is of little consequence, as long as it is only a retrospective philosophy, and does no harm to his art itself. We really should resist the temptation to begrudge an artist the occasional, perhaps very unfortunate and presumptuous masquerade; we mustn’t forget that inevitably there is something of the actor in all of our beloved artists, and that they would hardly have lasted very long without acting. Let us stay faithful to Wagner in that which is true and original in him – and especially in this, that we, his disciples, remain faithful to ourselves in that which is true and original in us. Let him have his intellectual moods and spasms, let us rather consider in all fairness what peculiar nutriments and excrements an art like his requires in order to be able to live and grow at all! It makes no difference that as a thinker he is so often wrong; justice and patience are of no importance to him. It is sufficient that his life is justified in his own eyes, and remains so – the life which calls to each of us, ‘Be a man, and do not follow me – but yourself, but yourself!’ Our lives should also be justified in our own eyes! We too should grow and flourish in accordance with our own natures, freely and fearlessly, in innocent selfishness! And so, in contemplation of such a man, these words still ring in my ears now as they did before: ‘That passion is better than Stoicism and hypocrisy; that to be honest even in evil is better than to lose oneself in traditional morality; that the free man can be good as well as evil, but that the unfree man is an affront to nature, and has no share in either heavenly or earthly comfort; finally, that anyone who wishes to be free must become so through their own efforts, and that freedom does not fall into anyone’s lap of its own accord like some kind of miraculous gift’ (Richard Wagner in Bayreuth, p. 94).
</i></p>

### Aphorism 105: *The Germans as Artists*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
When for once a German actually works himself into a passion (and not, as is usual, into the mere willingness to be passionate), he then comports himself as he must, and gives no further thought to his comportment. The truth, however, is that he then comports himself rather awkwardly and unattractively, and as if without rhythm or melody; so that spectators are embarrassed or disturbed as a result, and nothing more – unless he rises to the sublime and the enraptured state of which many passions are capable. Then even the German becomes beautiful! The presentiment of the height at which beauty begins to pour its magic even over Germans impels German artists to the heights and beyond, and to excesses of passion: they consequently have a truly profound longing to get beyond, or at least to look beyond this unattractiveness and awkwardness – towards a better, lighter, sunnier, more Southern world. And thus their spasms are often merely indications that they would like to dance: these poor bears in whom hidden nymphs and satyrs – and sometimes even higher divinities – live and move and have their being!
</i></p>

## Book III
### Aphorism 108: *New Struggles*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
After the Buddha died, people showed his shadow for centuries afterwards in a cave – a monstrous and unearthly shadow. God is dead; but given the ways of men, perhaps for millennia to come there will be caves in which His shadow will be shown.<br>
<br>
And we – we still have to subdue His shadow!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 109: *Let Us Beware!*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Let us beware of thinking that the world is a living being. To where would it spread? With what would it nourish itself? How could it grow and multiply? We have a pretty good idea what the organic is; and we are supposed to reinterpret something unspeakably derivative, late, rare and accidental, something we only perceive on the surface of the earth, into something essential, universal and eternal, as do those who call the universe an organism? That disgusts me. Let us beware of believing that the universe is a machine; it is certainly not constructed for any one purpose; we do it too much honour with the word ‘machine’. Let us beware of presupposing that something as perfectly shaped as the cyclical movements of our solar system obtains at all times and places; indeed a glance at the Milky Way raises doubts as to whether there are not much rougher and more contradictory movements there, and even stars with eternally linear paths and the like. The astronomical order in which we live is an exception; this order, and the considerable time which it requires, has again made possible that exception of exceptions, the development of organic life. The overall character of the world, however, is from all eternity chaos; not in the sense of a lack of necessity, but rather in the sense of a lack of order, structure, form, beauty, wisdom and whatever else our aesthetically attractive human qualities are called. The failures are by far the most numerous, the exceptions are not the secret purpose; and the whole music box perpetually repeats what should never be called a melody – and finally the very expression ‘failure’ is already an anthropomorphism which implies censure. But how could we presume to blame or praise the universe! Let us beware of imputing to it heartlessness and irrationality, or their opposites; it is neither perfect, nor beautiful, nor noble, nor wishes to become any of these things; it by no means strives to emulate man! It is by no means subject to our aesthetic and moral judgements! It also has no instinct for self-preservation, indeed, no instincts whatsoever; it also knows no law. Let us beware of saying that there are laws in nature. There are only necessities: there is no one who commands, no one who obeys, and no one who transgresses. When you know that nothing is intentional, then you also know that nothing is accidental; for it is only where there is a world of intentions that the word ‘accident’ has any meaning. Let us beware of saying that death is the opposite of life. The living is only a species of the dead, and a very rare one at that.<br>
<br>
Let us beware of thinking that the world perpetually creates what is new. There are no perpetually enduring substances; matter is as much an error as the god of the Eleatics. But when shall we have done with our caution and care? When will all these shadows of God no longer darken our understanding? When will we have completely demythologized nature? When may we begin to naturalize ourselves by means of the pure, newly discovered, newly redeemed nature?
</i></p>

### Aphorism 110: *Origin of Knowledge*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
For immense stretches of time the intellect produced nothing but errors; some of them proved useful and conducive to the preservation of the species: whoever hit upon or inherited them was more successful in the struggle on behalf of himself and his offspring. Those erroneous beliefs were continuously passed on until they almost became the common endowment of human nature. Examples include the belief that there are enduring things; that there are identical things; that there are material bodies; that a thing is what it appears to be; that our will is free; that what is good for me is also intrinsically good. It was only very late that the deniers and doubters of such propositions emerged – it was only very late that the truth emerged as the least powerful form of knowledge. It seemed as if we were unable to live with it, our organism was adapted to the opposite; all its higher functions, sensory perceptions, any kind of experience at all, operated with those primordially embodied, fundamental errors. Moreover, even within cognition itself those propositions became the standards according to which ‘true’ and ‘false’ were assessed – all the way up to the most abstruse regions of pure logic. Therefore the strength of the cognitions did not depend on the degree of truth they possessed, but on their age, their embodiment, their character as conditions of life. Where they seemed to conflict with these conditions, they were never seriously contested; denial and doubt were regarded here as madness. The exceptional thinkers like the Eleatics, who nevertheless espoused and adhered to the opposites of these natural errors, believed that it was also possible to live by these opposites; it was they who invented the sage as the man of immutable, impersonal and universal intuition who is simultaneously the One and the All, with his own faculty for this inverted knowledge; they believed that their knowledge was at the same time the principle of life. However, in order to be able to assert all this, they had to deceive themselves about their own condition: they had to ascribe to themselves impersonality and permanence without change, misunderstanding the nature of the mind, denying the dominant role of the instincts in cognition, and in general apprehending reason as an entirely free and self-originating activity; they closed their eyes to the fact that they too had arrived at their propositions out of opposition to common sense, or from a desire for tranquillity, exclusive possession or domination.<br>
<br>
The subtler development of honesty and scepticism eventually made these men impossible: their lives and their judgements also proved to be dependent on the primordial instincts and fundamental errors implicit in all sentient existence. The subtler honesty and scepticism arose wherever two opposing propositions appeared to be equally applicable to life, because both were compatible with the fundamental errors; under these circumstances, a dispute could arise as to which proposition had the higher or lower degree of utility for life. This subtler honesty and scepticism likewise arose whenever new propositions were shown to be, if not useful, at least not harmful; they could then be permitted expression as a form of intellectual playfulness, something innocent and delightful, like all games. Gradually the human brain was filled with such judgements and convictions; and so there arose from this tangled skein a ferment, struggle and lust for power. Not only utility and delight, but all sorts of impulses took part in the struggle over ‘truths’: intellectual struggle became an occupation, an attraction, a vocation, a duty, an honour – knowledge and the pursuit of truth eventually became needs in their own right. From that moment forward, not only belief and conviction, but also the tendency to examine, deny, distrust and contradict became a power; all the ‘evil’ instincts were subordinated to the desire for knowledge and placed in its service. These instincts then acquired the prestige of the permitted, the honoured, the useful, and eventually the look and the innocence of the good. The desire for knowledge thus became a part of life itself, and, as life, it became a continually growing power; until finally the desire for knowledge and those primordial, fundamental errors confronted each other, both as life, both as power, both in the same man. The thinker is now the being in whom the impulse towards truth and those life-preserving errors struggle for the first time, now that the impulse towards truth has also been proven to be a life-preserving power. The importance of this struggle is paramount; all else is a matter of indifference. I am raising the ultimate question concerning the conditions of life, and making an initial attempt to answer it by experiment. How far does truth admit of embodiment? That is the question, that is the experiment.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 112: *Cause and Effect*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
‘Explanation’ is what we call it; but ‘description’ is what distinguishes us from earlier stages of knowledge and science. We describe better – we explain just as little as our predecessors. We have discovered a complicated process where the more naive investigators of earlier periods saw only two things, ‘cause’ and ‘effect’, as they were called; we have done no more than perfect the image of becoming; we have not really fathomed what lies behind it. With each instance, the series of ‘causes’ lies before us that much more completely; we infer that such-and-such must first precede in order for something else to follow – but in so doing we have grasped nothing. For example, the qualitative aspect of every chemical process seems just as ‘miraculous’ as motion does; nobody has ever ‘explained’ impact. How could we explain anything! We operate only with things which do not exist, with lines, surfaces, bodies, atoms, divisible times, divisible spaces – how can we expect to explain anything when we start by making everything into an image, into our image! At most, we can regard science as humanizing things as faithfully as possible; we always learn to describe ourselves more accurately by describing things and their successions. Cause and effect: such a duality probably never exists; actually, what we have here is a continuum out of which we have isolated a few pieces; just as we always perceive motion as isolated points, and therefore do not really see it, but infer it. The suddenness with which many effects emerge leads us into error; but it is only sudden for us. There is an infinite multiplicity of processes in that second of suddenness which escape us. An intellect which could see cause and effect as a continuum, and not arbitrarily divided and dismembered as we do, an intellect which could see the flow of events – would reject the notion of cause and effect, and would deny all conditionality.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 116: *Gregarious Instinct*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Wherever we find a morality we find a value judgement and a hierarchy of human impulses and activities. These value judgements and hierarchies are always the expression of the needs of a community or herd; that which is to its greatest advantage – and its second-greatest, and third-greatest – is also the supreme standard by which the value of every individual is measured. Morality teaches the individual to become a function of the herd, and to ascribe value to himself only as a function. Since the conditions for the preservation of one community are quite different from those of another community, there have been quite different moralities; and with respect to substantial transformations of herds, communities, states and societies yet to come, we can predict that there will continue to be quite divergent moralities. Morality is the gregarious instinct in the individual.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 117: *The Herd’s Pang of Conscience*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
In the longest and remotest ages of mankind the pang of conscience was quite different from the way it is today. Today we only feel responsible for what we intend and do, and are proud of ourselves. All our professors of law start with this separate sense of self and sense of pleasure, as if the source of law had arisen from this. But for the longest time in mankind’s history there was nothing more terrible to a person than to feel separate. To be alone, to feel separate, neither to obey nor to rule, to signify individuality – that was not a pleasure but a punishment; one was condemned to ‘individuality’. Free-thinking was regarded as inherently disquieting. While we experience law and order as constraint and sacrifice, formerly it was egoism that was considered painful and genuinely distressing. To be oneself, to judge according to one’s own weights and measures – that was found distasteful. The propensity to do so was considered madness, for every misery and fear was associated with being alone. At that time, ‘free will’ was in close proximity to the bad conscience: the less independently a man acted, the more the gregarious instinct expressed itself in his conduct, the less of a sense of personhood he possessed, the more moral he judged himself to be. Everything that harmed the herd, whether it was intended or not, caused in him a pang of conscience – and likewise in his neighbour, and indeed in the whole herd! It is in this regard that our way of thinking has most changed.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 118: *Benevolence*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Is it virtuous when a cell transforms itself into a function of a stronger cell? It must. And is it evil when the stronger assimilates the weaker? It also must: it is necessary, for it has to have ample replenishment and wishes to regenerate itself. We therefore have to distinguish between two different forms of benevolence, depending upon whether it is the stronger or the weaker who shows it; in the former case, it is an expression of the impulse to appropriate, and in the latter, of the impulse to submit. In the strong, joy is accompanied by desire; the strong wish to transform something to a function. In the weak, joy is accompanied by the wish to be desired; the weak would like to become a function.<br>
<br>
Pity is essentially an instance of the former, an agreeable excitation of the appropriative impulse at the sight of the weak; it must be remembered, however, that ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ are relative terms. 
</i></p>

### Aphorism 122: *Moral Scepticism in Christianity*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Even Christianity has made a great contribution to enlightenment: it taught moral scepticism in a very forceful and effective manner, accusing and deprecating with untiring patience and subtlety; it annihilated every individual’s belief in his own ‘virtue’; it wiped off the face of the earth those celebrated prigs of whom there were so many in antiquity, men who, confident in their own perfection, strutted about with all the dignity of a matador. When we now read antiquity’s books about morality, for example those of Seneca or Epictetus, after being trained in this Christian school of scepticism, we feel an amused sense of superiority, and are full of hidden insights and overviews; it seems to us as if a child were speaking to an old man, or a beautiful young enthusiast to La Rochefoucauld: we know better what virtue is! Eventually, however, we have also applied this very scepticism to all religious states and processes, such as sin, repentance, grace and holiness, and have allowed the worm to burrow so deeply that we now have the same sense of subtle superiority and insight while reading any Christian books: we also know better what the religious sentiments are! And the time has come to know them well, to describe them well, for the pious of the old faith are also dying out – let us save their likeness and type, if only for the sake of knowledge!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 124: *In the Horizon of the Infinite*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
We have left dry land and put out to sea! We have burned the bridge behind us – what is more, we have burned the land behind us! Well, little ship, look out! Beside you is the ocean. True, it does not always roar, and sometimes it is spread out like silk and gold and a gentle reverie, but there will be hours when you realize that it is infinite, and that there is nothing more terrible than infinity. Oh, poor bird that felt free, and now beats against the bars of this cage! Alas, if homesickness should befall you, as if there had been more freedom there – when there is no longer any ‘land’!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 125: *The Madman*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Have you not heard of that madman who lit a lantern in the bright morning light, ran to the marketplace and shouted incessantly, ‘I seek God! I seek God!’? As there were many people standing together who did not believe in God, he caused much amusement. ‘Is He lost?’, asked one. ‘Did He wander off like a child?’, asked another. ‘Or is He hiding? Is He afraid of us?’ ‘Has He gone to sea? Has He emigrated?’ And in this manner they shouted and laughed. Then the madman leaped into their midst, and looked at them with piercing eyes and cried, ‘Where did God go? I will tell you! We have killed Him – you and I! We are all His murderers! But how did we do this? How were we able to drink up the sea? Who gave us the sponge to wipe away the whole horizon? What did we do when we unchained this earth from its sun? Where is it heading? Where are we heading? Away from all suns? Are we not constantly falling? Backwards, sidewards, forwards, in all directions? Is there still an above and below? Are we not straying as through an infinite nothingness? Do we not feel the breath of empty space? Has it not become colder? Is night not falling evermore? Mustn’t lanterns be lit in the morning? Do we hear nothing yet of the the noise of the gravediggers who are burying God? Do we smell nothing yet of the divine putrefaction? For even gods putrefy! God is dead! God remains dead! And we have killed Him! How shall we, the most murderous of all murderers, ever console ourselves? The holiest and mightiest thing that the world has ever known has bled to death under our knives – who will wash this blood clean from our hands? With what water might we be purified? What lustrations, what sacred games shall we have to invent? Is not the greatness of this deed too great for us? Must we not become gods ourselves, if only to appear worthy of it? There has never been a greater deed – and because of it, whoever is born after us belongs to a higher history than all history hitherto!’<br>
<br>
Here the madman fell silent and looked again at his listeners; they too were silent and stared at him, baffled. At last he threw his lantern on the ground, so that it broke into pieces and went out. ‘I have come too early,’ he then said, ‘this is not yet the right time. This tremendous event is still on its way and headed towards them – word of it has not yet reached men’s ears. Even after they are over and done with, thunder and lightning take time, the light of the stars takes time, and deeds too take time, before they can be seen and heard. This deed is further away from them than the farthest star – and yet they have done it themselves!’<br>
<br>
It is said that on that very day, the madman made his way into various churches, and there intoned his requiem aeternam deo. When led out and called to account, he always replied, ‘What are these churches now, if not the tombs and sepulchres of God?’
</i></p>

### Aphorism 127: *After-Effect of the Most Ancient Religiosity*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Each thoughtless person believes that the will is uniquely effective, that volition is something simple, absolutely given, underived and intrinsically intelligible. He is convinced that when he does anything, for example delivers a blow, it is he who strikes, and that he struck because he intended to strike. He does not notice a problem here; rather, the experience of volition is sufficient not only to persuade him that there is such a thing as cause and effect, but to instil in him the belief that he understands that relationship. Of the mechanism that lies behind the event, and the hundreds of complex and subtle activities which must transpire before the strike can take place, and likewise the inability of the will to achieve even the smallest portion of them by itself – of all this he knows nothing. To him, the will is a magically effective power: the belief in volition as the cause of effects is the belief in magically effective powers. Now originally, whenever man saw an event take place, he believed that a will was the cause, and that persons, volitional beings, were somewhere in the background, bringing it about – the very idea that a mechanism was involved was far from his mind. But because for immense periods of time man only believed in persons (and not in matter, forces, things and so on), the belief in cause and effect has become his fundamental belief which he applies to everything that happens – even now he still does so instinctively, acceding to an atavistic belief of the oldest pedigree. The propositions ‘no effect without a cause’ and ‘every effect is also a cause’ appear to be generalizations of much more circumscribed propositions, to wit, ‘where there are effects, there are acts of volition’, ‘there can only be effects on volitional beings’, ‘where there are effects on volitional beings, these are never just purely and passively suffered with no further effects ensuing from them, but rather, every form of suffering at the same time stimulates the will (to activity, defence, revenge or retribution)’. In the early history of mankind, the more general and the more circumscribed propositions were identical, the former were not generalizations of the latter, but rather the latter were meant to exemplify the former.<br>
<br>
Schopenhauer, with his assumption that being is will, has enthroned a primitive mythology; he seems never to have attempted an analysis of the will, because like everyone he believed in the simplicity and immediacy of all volition – while volition is such a well-coordinated mechanism that it frequently escapes all but the most penetrating of observers. Against him, I offer the following propositions. First, in order for the will to arise, an impression of pleasure and pain is necessary. Second, the fact that a vehement stimulus is perceived as pleasure or pain is a matter of the interpreting intellect, which for the most part operates unconsciously; one and the same stimulus may be interpreted as pleasure or pain. Third, it is only in intellectual beings that there is pleasure, pain and will; the vast majority of organisms have nothing of the kind.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 134: *Pessimists as Victims*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
When a profound dislike of existence gets the upper hand, what usually comes to light is some long-standing great error in a people’s diet, and the after-effects that result from it. The spread of Buddhism (not its origin) is thus to a considerable extent dependent on the excessive and almost exclusive consumption of rice by the Indians, and on the general atony that results therefrom. Perhaps modern European discontent should be viewed as the result of the fact that, thanks to the influence of Germanic tendencies, so many people in the Middle Ages were given to drink; the Middle Ages, that is, the intoxication of Europe.<br>
<br>
The German dislike of life is essentially a winter malady, which includes the effects of cellar air and furnace fumes in German living quarters.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 135: *Origin of Sin*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Sin, as it is now experienced wherever Christianity prevails or once prevailed, is a Jewish sentiment and a Jewish invention; and with respect to this background, which all Christian morality shares, Christianity was in fact bent on ‘Judaizing’ the whole world. To what an extent it succeeded at this in Europe is most keenly felt in the degree to which we find Greek antiquity – a world without the sense of sin – strange even now, despite our favourable attitude towards assimilating and incorporating it, something which whole generations and many distinguished individuals have not lacked. ‘Only when you repent is God gracious to you’ – a Greek would have found this laughable or offensive; he would say, ‘slaves may harbour such sentiments’. We are to imagine here a mighty, indeed an almighty being, who is nevertheless prone to vengeance; his power is so great that no injury can be inflicted upon him except where a point of honour is involved. Every sin is an affront to his dignity, a crimen laesae majestatis divinae12 – and nothing more! Contrition, degradation, grovelling – this is the one and only condition with which his grace is associated; it leads to the restoration of his divine honour! Whether or not some other injury is done by the sin, whether or not the seeds of some profound and growing calamity are sown by it, which, like a disease, takes hold of one man after another and squeezes the life out of him, this vainglorious Oriental potentate in heaven is blithely indifferent; sin is an offence against him, not against mankind! And when God bestows His grace upon a man, He also bestows upon him this blithe indifference to the natural consequences of sin. God and mankind are regarded here as so separated, as so opposed, that in essence sin against the latter is entirely impossible – every deed should be considered only with a view to its supernatural consequences, not its natural ones: that is how Jewish sentiment would have it, for Jewish sentiment regards everything natural as inherently unworthy. The Greeks, on the other hand, seemed to think that sacrilege too could have dignity – even theft, as with Prometheus, even the slaughter of cattle as the expression of an insane jealousy, as with Ajax; in their need to impute some dignity to sacrilege, to make dignity at least some part of it, they invented tragedy – an art and a pleasure which, despite all their poetic gifts and their tendency towards the sublime, remained profoundly alien to the Jews.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 137: *Spoken in Parable*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
A Jesus Christ was only possible in a Jewish landscape – I mean a landscape over which the gloomy and sublime thundercloud of Jehovah’s wrath continually hung. Here alone would a sudden and unexpected ray of sunshine that penetrates the horribly constant and pervasive daylight darkness be regarded as a miracle of ‘love’, as the light of the most unmerited ‘grace’. Here alone could Christ dream of his rainbow and his celestial ladder on which God descended to man; everywhere else the clear weather and sunshine were considered regular and everyday occurrences.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 140: *Too Jewish*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
If God wanted to become the object of our love, then He ought to have forgone judging and justice first – for a judge, even a merciful one, is no object of love. The founder of Christianity displayed an insufficiently refined sensibility in these matters – being a Jew.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 143: *The Greatest Advantage of Polytheism*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
For the individual to establish his own ideal and derive from it his own laws, his own pleasures and his own rights – in the past that was probably regarded as the most monstrous of all human aberrations, and as inherently idolatrous; in fact, the few who have dared to do so have always needed to apologize to themselves, usually in the following manner: ‘Not I! Not I! But rather a god working through me!’ It was in the wonderful art and ability to create gods – in polytheism – that this impulse could discharge itself, that it purified, perfected and ennobled itself; for originally this impulse was rather commonplace and unattractive, not unlike stubbornness, rebelliousness or envy. Formerly, hostility towards this desire for an ideal of one’s own was the law of every morality. There was only one type and standard: ‘man’ – and every people believed itself to be this type, to be in possession of this standard. But in a distant heaven above and beyond oneself, one could discern a multiplicity of standards; to worship a particular god was not to deny or blaspheme against the other gods! It was here that individuals were first permitted, that the rights of individuals were first honoured. The invention of gods, heroes and superhuman beings of all kinds, as well as of quasi-human and subhuman beings – dwarfs, fairies, centaurs, satyrs, demons, devils – was an inestimable preliminary exercise in upholding the interests and prerogatives of the individual: the freedom one allowed a god with respect to other gods, one eventually gave to oneself with respect to laws, customs and neighbours. Monotheism, by contrast, is the inexorable consequence of the doctrine that there is only one type of man, and only one standard appropriate to him – and therefore the belief that there can be only one god for him, apart from whom there are only false gods. Such a conception was perhaps the greatest danger confronting mankind so far, because it threatened man with the same stagnation at which most other species of animals have already arrived, in that all of them believe in one type of animal and one ideal for their species, and have conclusively translated this morality of custom into flesh and blood. In polytheism, man’s free-thinking and ‘poly-thinking’ is prefigured – to wit, his ability to create for himself new eyes, his own eyes, eyes which are ever newer, ever more his own. For this reason, man is the only animal for whom there are no eternal horizons or perspectives.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 145: *Danger of Vegetarians*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The enormous prevalence of the consumption of rice has led to the use of opium and narcotics, in the same way that the enormous prevalence of the consumption of potatoes has led to the use of spirits – but it also leads to subtler after-effects with respect to modes of thought and sensibility which have a narcotic effect. This is consistent with the fact that those who promote narcotic modes of thought and sensibility, like those Indian sages, praise a purely vegetarian diet, and would like to make it a law for the masses; in this way they hope to create and increase a need which they are then in a position to satisfy.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 147: *Question and Answer*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
What is the first thing primitive peoples accept from Europeans? Liquor and Christianity, the European narcotics.<br>
<br>
And from what do they most quickly perish? The European narcotics.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 149: *The Failure of Reformations*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
It is a testimony to the superior culture of the Greeks that even in quite early times, several attempts to found new Greek religions failed; it suggests that from the very beginning, there must have been many different kinds of individuals in Greece, whose various kinds of distress could not be remedied by a single prescription of faith and hope. Pythagoras and Plato, perhaps even Empedocles, and, already much earlier, the Orphic rhapsodists, set out to found new religions; and the first two in particular had such natural gifts in this regard, not to mention the temperament and disposition for it, that their failure is nothing short of astonishing: all that they accomplished was to found sects. Every time that the reformation of an entire people fails and only sects rear their heads, we may infer that the people already contained various kinds of men, and had begun to break free from the coarser gregarious instincts and from the morality of custom – a condition fraught with significance, one in which everything remains in a state of suspense, a condition which we are accustomed to disparage as one of moral corruption and decline, but which in fact prefigures the ripening of the egg and the imminent breaking of the eggshell. The fact that Luther’s Reformation succeeded in the North is a sign that Northern Europe had lagged behind the South, and as yet was only acquainted with needs of nearly the same kind and colour; and there would have been no conversion to Christianity in Europe at all if the culture of antiquity in the South had not been gradually barbarized by an excessive admixture of Germanic barbarian blood, and thereby forfeited its cultural superiority. The more general and absolute the influence of an individual, or the idea of an individual, the more similar and lowly must be the mass upon which it is exercised; while the opposing efforts betray opposing internal requirements, which also wish to prevail and gratify themselves. Conversely, one may always infer that a culture is actually superior when powerful and ambitious natures produce only a small and sectarian effect; this also applies to the individual arts and the fields of knowledge. Where there is ruling, there are masses, and where there are masses, there is a need for slavery. Where there is slavery, individuals are but few, and have the gregarious instincts and the conscience against them.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 158: *An Inconvenient Quality*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
To find everything deep is an inconvenient quality: it makes us constantly strain our eyes, and in the end we always find more than we wish.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 173: *Being Profound and Being Thought Profound*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Whoever knows that he is profound strives for clarity; whoever would like the crowd to think he is profound strives for obscurity. The reason for this is that the crowd thinks something is profound whenever it cannot see to the bottom of it; it is afraid of the water and hates to get its feet wet.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 220: *Sacrifice*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Sacrificial animals’ thoughts about self-sacrifice are different from those of the spectators; but one has never let them have their say.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 251: *Misunderstood Sufferers*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The suffering of great men is very different from the suffering their admirers imagine; for they do not suffer most severely from the sacrifices and martyrdoms which their tasks require of them, but from their own momentary lapses into unworthiness and pettiness: in short, from their own doubts as to their own greatness. As long as Prometheus has pity for men and sacrifices himself for them, he is great and happy; but as soon as he falls into jealousy of Zeus and the homage Zeus receives from mortals – then he suffers!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 253: *Always at Home*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
One day we reach our goal – and henceforth point with pride to the long distances we travelled to reach it. In truth, we did not notice that we were travelling. We went so far because in every place through which we passed, we imagined that we were already at home.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 268: *What Makes You Heroic?*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
To face at the same time your greatest suffering and your greatest hope.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 269: *What Do You Believe?*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
In this: that the weights of all things must be determined anew.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 270: *What Does Your Conscience Say?*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
‘You shall become who you are.’
</i></p>

### Aphorism 271: *What Is Your Greatest Danger?*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Pity.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 272: *What Do You Love in Others?*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
My hopes.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 273: *Whom Do You Call Bad?*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Those who always want to put others to shame.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 274: *What Is Most Humane?*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
To spare someone shame.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 275: *What Is the Seal of Liberation?*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
To no longer be ashamed of oneself.
</i></p>
## Book IV: Sanctus Januarius

### Aphorism 276: *For the New Year*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
I am still alive, I am still thinking; I must remain alive, for I must continue thinking. Sum, ergo cogito; cogito, ergo sum. Today everyone is allowed to express their fondest thoughts and wishes; well, I too want to say what it is that I have wished for myself today, what thought first crossed my mind at the beginning of this year – a thought with which I may justify, and to which I shall pledge, the rest of my life, a thought to render my life sweet! I want to come to regard everything necessary as beautiful – so that I will become one of those who makes everything beautiful. Amor fati: from now on, let that be my love! I do not want to wage war against the ugly. I do not want to accuse anyone, I do not even want to accuse the accusers. May averting my eyes be my only negation! All in all, and on the whole, some day I hope only to be an affirmer!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 277: *Personal Providence*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
There is a certain high point in life, and once we have attained it, despite all the freedom we have won for ourselves, and the extent to which we deny that there is any benevolent reason or goodness in this beautiful chaos of an existence, we are once again confronted with the greatest threat to our intellectual freedom, and have to face our hardest test. It is only now that the thought of a personal providence impresses itself upon us with great force, having the best advocate, first-hand experience, to speak on its behalf, for it is a palpable fact that everything we encounter repeatedly turns out for the best. Every day and every hour, life seems to be eager for nothing more than to prove this proposition anew; whatever it may be, bad or good weather, the loss of a friend, an illness, a slander, a letter not arriving, a sprained ankle, a glance into a shop window, a counter-argument, the opening of a book, a dream, a swindle: it becomes apparent immediately, or shortly thereafter, that it was something ‘indispensable’ – something full of profound significance and advantage precisely for us! Is there anything besides such experiences which could so dangerously tempt us to dismiss the indifferent and unknowable gods of Epicurus, and believe instead in some anxious and petty divinity who personally knows every hair on our heads, and who has no aversion to rendering the most paltry of services? Well – all this notwithstanding, we wish to leave the gods in peace (and the serviceable genii as well), and to content ourselves with the assumption that our own practical and theoretical aptitude for the arrangement and explanation of events has now reached its zenith. We do not want to think too highly of our intellectual dexterity when the wonderful harmony which results from our playing on our instrument sometimes surprises even us: a harmony which sounds too good for us to dare to attribute it to ourselves. In fact, now and then, there is one who plays with us – our old friend chance; occasionally he leads us by the hand, and even an omniscient providence could not devise a finer music than that of which our foolish hand is then capable.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 278: *The Thought of Death*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
It fills me with a melancholy happiness to live in the midst of this confusion of streets, of needs, of voices: how much enjoyment, impatience and desire, how much thirsty life and drunkenness of life comes into view here every day! And yet it will soon be so still for all these noisy people, the living with their thirst for life! Behold how behind every one of them stands his shadow, his dark companion! It is always like the final moment before a ship full of emigrants sets sail: people have more to say to one another than ever, the hour is pressing, the ocean and its desolate silence waits impatiently behind all the noise – so avid, so certain of its prey! And everyone, everyone thinks that what has gone before is little or nothing, that the near future is everything; hence all this haste, all this clamour, all this constant attempt to shout down and outwit one another! Everyone wants to be pre-eminent in this future – and yet death and the stillness of death are the only things that are certain and common to all in this future! How strange that this one certainty and commonality has almost no power over men, and that nothing is further from their minds than the brotherhood of death! I am glad that men try to avoid the thought of death altogether! I should like to do something to make the thought of life still a hundred times more memorable.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 280: *Architecture for Knowledge-Seekers*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
We must recognize sooner or later that what is most lacking in our great cities are broad and spacious places for quiet reflection, places with long, lofty cloisters for when the weather is bad or all too sunny, where no sound of carriages or of town criers would penetrate, and where a more refined decorum would prohibit even the priest from praying aloud: buildings and facilities which as a whole would express the sublimity of contemplation and seclusion. The time is past when the Church can maintain a monopoly on reflection, when the vita contemplativa must first be the vita religiosa; but everything the Church has built expresses this thought. I do not know how we can be satisfied with their structures, even if they should be divested of their ecclesiastical purpose; these structures speak a far too declamatory and prejudiced language, as houses of God and gaudy places for supernatural intercourse, for us godless ones to be able to think our thoughts in them. We want to translate ourselves into stone and greenery, we want to walk in ourselves when we walk in these halls and gardens.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 283: *Preparatory Men*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
I welcome all the signs that a more masculine and warlike age is approaching, which will, above all, restore honour to courage! For it should pave the way to a still-higher age, and gather the strength which the latter will some day require – that age which will carry heroism into knowledge, and wage wars for the sake of ideas and their consequences. To that end many brave preparatory men are now needed, who, however, cannot spring from nothing – any more than from the sand and slime of contemporary civilization and the culture of its great cities; men with the ability to remain silent, solitary, resolute, contented with and persistent in invisible activity; men who have an inner inclination to seek in all things that which is to be overcome in them; men to whom cheerfulness, patience, simplicity and contempt for the great vanities belong just as much as do magnanimity in victory and forbearance towards the petty vanities of all who are vanquished; men with an acute and independent judgement regarding all victors, and the part chance plays in all victories and all fame; men with their own festivals, their own work days, and their own periods of mourning, accustomed to command with assurance, and equally prepared to obey if necessary, equally proud in the one as in the other, equally serving their own interests; men who are more endangered, more fruitful, more happy! For believe me – the secret to harvesting the greatest fruitfulness and the greatest enjoyment from existence is to live dangerously! Build your cities on the slope of Vesuvius! Send your ships into uncharted seas! Live in war with your equals and with yourselves! Be robbers and conquerers, you knowledge-seekers, as long as you cannot be rulers and possessors! The time will soon be past when it will be enough for you to live like shy deer hiding in the woods. Eventually knowledge will stretch out her hand to take what is due to her – for she intends to rule and possess the things of this world, and you with them!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 340: *The Dying Socrates*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
I admire the courage and wisdom of Socrates in all that he did, said – and did not say. This mocking and amorous rogue, this Pied Piper of Athens who made even the most wanton youths tremble and sob, was not only the wisest chatterer that ever lived; he was just as great in his silence. I wish that he would also have been silent in the last moment of his life – perhaps then he would have belonged to an even higher order of spirits. Whether it was death, or poison, or piety, or sheer malice – something loosened his tongue at that moment, and he said: ‘Oh Crito, we ought to offer a cock to Asclepius.’ For those who have ears, these ludicrous and terrible ‘last words’ mean: ‘Oh Crito, life is a disease!’ Is it possible that a man like him, who had lived cheerfully and to all appearances like a soldier – was a pessimist? He had merely adopted a cheerful demeanour towards life, and all along concealed his ultimate judgement, his innermost sentiment! Socrates, Socrates suffered from life! And he still took his revenge on it – with those veiled, horrible, pious and blasphemous words! Did Socrates have to avenge himself? Despite the fact that he possessed an abundance of virtue, was he not quite magnanimous enough to resist this temptation?<br>
<br>
Oh my friends! We have to surpass even the Greeks!
</i></p>

### Aphorism 341: *The Greatest Weight*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
What if one day or night a demon came to you in your most solitary solitude and said to you: ‘This life, as you now live it and have lived it, you will have to live again, and innumerable times again, and there will be nothing new in it; but rather every pain and joy, every thought and sigh, and all the unutterably trivial or great things in your life will have to happen to you again, with everything in the same series and sequence – and likewise this spider and this moonlight between the trees, and likewise this moment and I myself. The eternal hourglass of existence will be turned over again and again, and you with it, you speck of dust!’<br>
<br>

Would you not throw yourself down and gnash your teeth and curse the demon who spoke to you thus? Or was there one time when you experienced a tremendous moment in which you would answer him: ‘You are a god, and I have never heard anything so divine!’ If that thought took hold of you as you are, it would transform you and perhaps crush you; the question with regard to each and every thing, ‘Do you want this again, innumerable times again?’ would weigh upon your actions with the greatest weight! Or how well disposed would you have to become to yourself and to life, that you might long for nothing more than this final eternal confirmation and seal?
</i></p>

### Aphorism 342: *Incipit Tragoedia*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
When Zarathustra was thirty years old, he left his home and Lake Urmi and went into the mountains. There he enjoyed his spirit and his solitude, and for ten years did not tire of them. But in the end his heart changed, and one morning he arose with the dawn and, facing the sun, spoke to it thus: ‘Oh, you great star! What happiness would you enjoy, without those for whom you shine? For ten years you have come up to my cave, and you would have grown weary of your light and of this path, were it not for me, my eagle and my serpent. But we awaited you every morning, received your abundance, and blessed you for it. Behold! I grow weary of my wisdom, like the bee that has gathered too much honey; I need hands outstretched to receive it. I should like to dispense and distribute it until the wise again rejoice in their folly, and the poor in their riches. To that end, I must descend into the depths, as you do in the evening when you go behind the sea and bring light even to the underworld, you superabundant star! Like you I must go down, as the people to whom I will descend call it. Bless me then, oh you calm eye, who can behold even an excess of happiness without envy! Bless the cup which wants to run over, so that the water may flow golden out of it, and carry everywhere the reflection of your bliss! Behold! This cup wants to be empty again, and Zarathustra wants to be a man again.’<br>
<br>
And with that, Zarathustra began to go down.
</i></p>

## Book V: We Fearless Ones
### Aphorism 343: *What Our Cheerfulness Means*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The greatest event of recent times – the fact that ‘God is dead’, that the belief in the Christian God has become untenable – has already begun to cast its first shadows over Europe. For the few at least whose eyes, whose suspicious eyes, are strong enough and subtle enough for this drama, some sun seems to have set, some ancient and profound confidence has turned into doubt; to these eyes our old world must seem to be becoming more vespertine, distrustful, strange and ‘old’ with every passing day. In the main, however, we may say that the event itself is much too great, too remote, too far beyond most people’s capacity to understand, for us to imagine that even the tidings of it could have reached their ears, let alone that very many people would already know what its actual implications were, or what things would have to collapse, now that this belief had been undermined, because they were built upon it, leaned against it and had become intertwined with it: for example, our entire European morality. With regard to this long and abundant train of consequences which are now imminent, this demolition and destruction, this decline and fall, who nowadays has already divined enough of it to have to play the educator and prognosticator of this tremendous logic of terror, to play the prophet of a gloom and solar eclipse the like of which has probably never before existed on earth?<br>
<br>
Even we natural-born speculators who, so to speak, wait on the mountains, posted between today and tomorrow, spanning the contradiction between today and tomorrow, we firstlings and premature births of the coming century for whom the shadows which, incidentally, should have arrived by now, the shadows which must soon afterwards envelop Europe – how is it that we ourselves await its advent without properly participating in this gloom, without any concern or fear for ourselves? Perhaps we stand too close to the immediate consequences of this event – and these immediate consequences, its consequences for ourselves, are the reverse of what one might have expected, they are by no means sad and gloomy, but rather like a new and indescribable kind of light, happiness, relief, amusement, encouragement and dawn …<br>
<br>
In fact, we philosophers and ‘free spirits’ experience the news that the ‘old God is dead’ as if illuminated by a new dawn; our hearts are overflowing with gratitude, astonishment, presentiment and expectation – at last the horizon seems free again, even if it is not bright; at last our ships can set sail again, ready to face every danger; every venture of the knowledge-seeker is permitted again; the sea, our sea, lies open again before us; perhaps there has never been such an ‘open sea’.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 345: *Morality as a Problem*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
A personal defect takes its revenge everywhere; an enfeebled, slight, self-effacing and self-denying personality is no longer good for anything – least of all for philosophy. ‘Selflessness’ has no value in heaven or on earth; great problems all demand great love and it is only the frank, strong, self-confident spirits with steady nerves who are at all proficient with them. It makes a considerable difference whether a thinker takes his problems personally, finding in them his destiny, his distress and even his greatest happiness; or merely ‘impersonally’, that is to say, if he can only grasp and comprehend them with little feelers of cold and inquisitive thought. In the latter case nothing comes of it, I can assure you, for the great problems, assuming that they can be grasped at all, elude the grasp of toads and weaklings; that has been their taste since time began – a taste, by the way, which they share with all doughty women.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 353: *Of the Origin of Religions*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
The actual inventiveness of founders of religions consists in the following: to establish a particular way of life and its daily customs which is to serve as a disciplina voluntatis while doing away with boredom; and then to give to that very way of life an interpretation by virtue of which it seems to be a good surrounded by a halo of supreme worthiness; so that in the end people will fight for it, and, under certain circumstances, even die for it. In fact, the second of these inventions is the more essential one; the first, the way of life, was usually there already, along with other ways of life, and unaware of the value which it embodies. The significance and originality of the founder of a religion is usually manifested in the fact that he observes this way of life, chooses it and divines for the first time to what ends it should be employed and how it might be interpreted. For example, Jesus (or Paul) encountered the life of the common people in the Roman province, a modest, virtuous, difficult life; he interpreted it, invested it with the highest significance and value. As a result, he possessed the courage to despise every other way of life, the quiet fanaticism of the Moravian Brethren, and a secret, subterranean self-confidence which grew ever stronger until it was finally ready to ‘overcome the world’ (that is, Rome and the upper classes throughout the empire). The Buddha also encountered the same kind of people scattered among all the classes and social strata of his nation, people who, owing to indolence, were good and kind (and above all inoffensive), and who, likewise owing to indolence, lived abstemiously, almost without a care. He understood that this sort of person, with all its vis inertiae, inevitably drifts into a belief which promises to prevent the recurrence of earthly travail (that is to say, labour and activity of any kind) – this ‘understanding’ was his genius. The founder of a religion possesses an infallible psychological knowledge of a specific, mediocre kind of personality, even though such people have not yet recognized that they belong together. It is he who brings them together: the founding of a religion is always one long festival of recognition.
</i></p>

### Aphorism 370: *What Is Romanticism?*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
It may be remembered at least among my friends that I initially took aim at the modern world with some gross errors and exaggerations, but at any rate with high hopes. I recognized (from who knows what personal experiences?) the philosophical pessimism of the nineteenth century as the symptom of a stronger mode of thought, a more daring courage and a more triumphant abundance of life than had been characteristic of the eighteenth century, the age of Hume, Kant, Condillac and the Sensualists; so that tragic knowledge seemed to me the peculiar luxury of our culture, its most precious, noble and dangerous form of extravagance; but nevertheless, on account of its superabundance, a permissible luxury. In the same way I interpreted German music as the expression of a Dionysian power in the German soul: I thought I heard in it the earthquake with which a primal force was finally being vented, a force that had been building up for ages – indifferent as to whether everything else called culture was made to tremble as a result. It is obvious that at the time I misunderstood both philosophical pessimism and German music, and what constitutes their actual character – their Romanticism. What is Romanticism? Every art and every philosophy may be regarded as a remedy and aid in the service of growing, struggling life: they always presuppose suffering and sufferers. But there are two kinds of sufferers: those who suffer from a superabundance of life and who want a Dionysian art, and likewise a tragic conception of and insight into life; and those who suffer from an impoverishment of life who seek peace and quiet, becalmed seas and deliverance from themselves through art or knowledge, or else intoxication, convulsion, narcosis, madness. All Romanticism in art and knowledge responds to a twofold necessity in the latter kind of sufferers; to them Schopenhauer as well as Wagner responded (and responds) – to name the two most celebrated and emphatic Romantics, both of whom were at the time misunderstood by me – and by the way, you must admit in all fairness to myself, not at all to their disadvantage. The Dionysian god or man who is richest in superabundant life can afford not only to see the terrible and questionable things, but even to do terrible deeds, with all their attendant luxury of destruction, disintegration and negation; for him evil, absurdity and ugliness seem acceptable, so to speak, in consequence of the plenitude of procreative, fructifying power, which can transform every desert into verdant farmlands. Conversely the greatest sufferer, the impoverished man, would have the greatest need for gentleness, peace and benevolence in thought and deed; he would need, if possible, a God who is actually the God of the sick, a ‘Saviour’; similarly, he would have need of logic, the abstract intelligibility of existence, for logic soothes the soul and inspires confidence – in short, he would need a certain warm, reassuring narrowness and enclosure within optimistic horizons. In this way I gradually began to understand Epicurus, the opposite of a Dionysian pessimist,30 and likewise the ‘Christian’, who in fact is only a kind of Epicurean, and like him essentially a Romantic – and my vision has always become more acute in tracing that most difficult and delicate of all forms of retrospective inference, the one in which most mistakes have been made – the inference from the work to its author, from the deed to its doer, from the ideal to him who has need of it, from every mode of thought and evaluation to the imperious necessity behind it.<br>
<br>
With regard to all aesthetic values I now avail myself of this principal distinction: in every case I ask myself, has want or abundance been creative here? From the outset, another distinction would seem to have more to recommend it – it is far more obvious – namely, attention to whether the desire for the fixed and the immortal, for being, on the one hand, or rather the desire for destruction, for change, for novelty, for future, for becoming, on the other, has been the principle of creation. But both kinds of desire prove on closer examination to be ambiguous, that is to say, explicable precisely in accordance with the preceding scheme, to which I have (and, it seems to me, rightly) given pride of place. The desire for destruction, for change, for becoming can be the expression of a power overflowing and pregnant with hope (my terminus for this, as is well known, is ‘Dionysian’); but it can also be the hatred of the ill-constituted, deprived and unfortunate man who destroys and must destroy, because he is provoked and enraged by what exists, indeed, by existence itself – to understand this emotion we need only observe closely our anarchists. The desire to immortalize likewise requires a twofold interpretation. It can be the product of gratitude and love – works born of such a desire are always a kind of apotheosis, perhaps a dithyrambic one, as in Rubens, or a blissfully mocking one, as in Hāfez, or a bright and benevolent one, as in Goethe, works which spread a Homeric nimbus of light over all things. However, this desire can also be the expression of the tyrannical will of someone who undergoes great suffering, struggles and torture, someone who would make what is most personal, individual and intimate, what is actually idiosyncratic about his suffering, into a binding law and constraint and thereby take his revenge upon all things, so to speak, stamping and branding them with his own image, the image of his own torment. The latter impulse finds its most expressive form in Romantic pessimism, whether it be as Schopenhauer’s philosophy of the will, or as Wagner’s music – Romantic pessimism, the last great event in the destiny of our culture. (That there may be quite a different kind of pessimism, a classical pessimism – this presentiment and vision belongs to me, as something inseparable from me, as my proprium and ipsissimum;31 except that I dislike the sound of the word ‘classical’, for it has become far too well worn, too approximate and indecipherable. I call that pessimism of the future – for it is coming! I see it coming! – Dionysian pessimism.)
</i></p>

### Aphorism 383: *Epilogue*
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
But while I slowly, slowly bring the painting of this gloomy question mark to a conclusion, and am still willing to remind my readers of the virtues of proper reading – oh, what forgotten and unfamiliar virtues – it seems to me that I hear the sound of the most mischievous, lively, fairy-like laughter: the spirits of my book themselves are pestering me, pulling my ears and calling me to order. ‘We cannot take it any more,’ they call to me, ‘away, away with this raven-black music. Is it not bright morning all around us? And soft green grass and ground, the kingdom of the dance? Was there ever a better time to be joyful? Who will sing us a song, a morning song so sunny, so light and so fully fledged that it will not drive away the crickets – but instead will invite them to join in, to sing and dance? And better a simple rustic bagpipe than such mysterious sounds, such prophecies of doom, sepulchral voices and cries of alarm, with which you have hitherto regaled us in your wilderness, Herr Hermit and Musician of the Future! No! Not such tones! Rather, let us strike up something more pleasant and more joyful!’<br>
<br>
Is that how you like it, my impatient friends? Well! Who could not agree? My bagpipe is waiting, and my voice too – it may sound a little hoarse, but what do you expect? After all, we are in the mountains! But at least what you hear will be new; and if you do not understand it, if you misunderstand the singer, what difference does it make? That has always been ‘the singer’s curse’. It even allows you to hear the music and the melody more clearly, which will make it easier for you to dance to my piping. Shall we begin?
</i></p>


# General notes

