## Author
[[Plato]]
## Genres
#Philosophy 
#Dialogue 
[[Philosophy of Language]]
[[Epistemology]]
# Summary
Socrates is brought into a discussion between Hermogenes and Cratylus on the subject of the names we give things and how innate they are. Cratylus argues that there is a correctness of what things are named governed by nature, meanwhile Hermogenes argues that the name of things is simply whatever we call them based on convention. Socrates in debate with Hermogenes' doctrine cites [[Protagoras]]' doctrine of men being a measure of all things, Hermogenes' expressing discontent in his assertion a man is a measure of all things and truth is in their perception. Socrates agrees, saying if every man's truth was the truth then there could be no true good or bad, only differing perceptions of them. he says there is a correct tool for every job, such that we should use that tool to be most effective, the natural way. Socrates extends this to speech, he surmises that words are tools and thus there must be a most natural way of using them. there is a true way of using them and false way, so in theory there is a true name and a false one. in the same vein a good weaver will use a shuttle well, so a good instructor will use names well, so to use names well is to use them as an instructor does. some people possess a craft, and thus they should be trusted when discussing that craft. there is a name maker, a man who makes names, and like a shuttle or a drill most naturally finds the way to fulfil their jobs, a name maker uses the most natural name for a thing.

he goes on to explain how cultures name different things is not because the other names are wrong, but is like how two weavers may use two different shuttles made of different things or ways, or a blacksmith uses different iron to another. they are both valid, just different. the form matters more than the specifics of the object. but it also matters who uses the tool, a lyre player supervises a lyre maker and a captain a ship builder to judge if it is good or not. in the same way someone who asks questions, a dialectician is responsible for supervising language makers. in this line Socrates decides names are no trivial task, so Cratylus must be correct that there is some natural name to things. but what is this correctness? they begin by deciding the gods must call things the most correct names due to their divinity. they go on to speak of the offspring of animals. if a cow gives birth to a calf it's obviously a calf, but if it gave birth to a colt its most obviously a colt not a calf. but this is a little tricky, as a king doesn't give birth to a king which doesn't make sense. but it is the essence that matters, not the form, we may call things different things but they still are the same. a king's son is a king until he is a poor ruler, and should be called according to that essence. the most natural name due to that essence.

but Socrates identifies this at times as retroactive of hoping for the names to stick and the essence follow, so decide they must discuss what always exists in nature. he speaks of how foreigners saw the moon and stars and saw them move, they gave them the name *theoi* as they were things that ran. when they learned of other heavenly things such as gods, they called them the same. he speaks of how daemons were golden people, a race of gold opposed to the race of iron of humans. they were good and wise or knowing (*daemones*). heroes are named as they are born from *eros* between a mortals and gods. humans are called *anthropos* as they are one who observes closely what he has seen (*anathron ha opope*). they go on at length about the many different names given to things including how the gods came to have their names. he notes in Greek Wisdom derives it's name from understanding motion. judgement comes from examining what is begotten. understanding is a longing for the new.

returning after many examples to what makes a name correct, Socrates proposes that a correct name proposes it's nature. it imitates the nature. imitates can be true and can be false in nature, imitating the wrong thing. he thus decides that the study of names is illusionary and must be inferior to the study of the ideas themselves, and thus, rejects it's study.
# General notes
this seems more like a mythological jerk off than a dialogue.
