## Author
[[Plato]]
## Genres
#Philosophy 
#Dialogue 
[[Ethics]]
# Summary
After [[Apology]] where Socrates was sentenced to death, due to a religious mission by the Athenian state his execution was a month later. Crito comes to Socrates the day before the galley is to return, begging him to let Crito help him escape. he says it weighs on Crito's reputation as many will think he could have paid Socrates out, but had simply refused to, when it was in fact Socrates who refused to escape his death. Socrates tells him to simply not worry about the general public, they are unable to seemingly to inflict great evils nor great goods, but only in-betweens. Crito also assures Socrates he and his friends are willing to lose everything they have to rescue Socrates, if he is willing. he considers it a betrayal for Socrates to leave his sons when he could raise them, considering it an injustice to abandon ones children. he goes onto blame themselves for not stopping the trial, and shame for them both. he asks Socrates to let him try to convince him to escape.

Socrates, the chaser of knowledge himself, is open to a dialogue to try to convince him. he first tackles the proposition of Crito worrying about what opinion people hold of him, concluding that one must value the opinions of some and not others. you don't go to a shoemaker for an opinion on law. he should follow the opinion of a lawyer for the law, or potentially suffer due to it. in the same vein, Socrates reasons that one should not worry about what the general public will think, but what those who understand justice and injustice think of them. he acknowledges but, that the many is who put him to death, so does he really care not for the many opinion in this case? he believes it irrelevant, as too the consideration of money, loss of property or raising of children. it's more important to live a good life cut short due to the majority putting you to death than a longer life but riddled with disease due to listening to those who are unqualified. they are primarily concerned with if Socrates escaping is just, and if they deem it unjust, will have to leave him to his fate.

Socrates goes on to ask if it is ever just to do wrong. Crito responds it to never be just, even when wronged you should not wrong your wrongdoer. Socrates agrees to this, and furthers it to ask if one makes an agreement, one should also always fulfil it. but the city has agreed to put Socrates to death, and thus his escape would be a wrong towards the free men of Athens. thus, it is unjust for him to escape, as it goes against the moral code and laws of the city. it would nullify every charge the city has levied if they were to decide this specific case was unjust and wrong and to on their own act against it. the state is like a master of a parent, and in that case the just is very diffrent. you do not strike back at them for wronging you or go against their wishes even if they are unjust. Socrates could have convinced the city to give him exile at trial, but he didn't, and so he must accept it's decision now instead of going back on his word. and thus he should not follow Crito's request. Crito accepts this, and lets Socrates have his fate. 
# General notes
