## Author
[[Plato]]
## Genres
#Philosophy 
#Drama 
[[Epistemology]]
[[Metaphysics]]
# Summary
the drama begins with Phaedo telling Echecrates of how he was present at the execution of Socrates. Echecrates asks for the details of his execution, as no Athenians visit Phlius these days to spread such information. Phaedo tells Echecrates they would meet at the court each day and then visit Socrates once the prison opened to spend the day with him. the day before his death, they were told of the arrival of the ship from Delos, meaning Socrates would be executed the next day.

they met early the following morning, going to see him. they take Socrates' wife home as he prepares to be killed. Socrates remarks how pain and pleasure seem to come in pairs, his bonds had hurt him but not pleasure is following. he seems to think his death has some beauty and pleasure in it, confusing his friends. they ask in turn why it is considered so wrong to kill oneself. Socrates responds that in a way, it is an insult for the gods, for them to give you a vessel and leave it earlier than you were meant to by forces outside oneself. but in turn, if it is wise to recognise that one has a duty to the gods to live their natural span, why is it so that Socrates is letting his death come to him? Socrates states in response he himself believes he is going to be with good gods, and he believes a future waits after death.

in the end Socrates states he thinks philosophy is the art of practicing death before it comes to you, so it's foolish to then resent it when it comes for you. they agree that death is simply the separation of body and soul, but the philosophers study is in cultivating a rich soul, not a rich body. this is done by acquiring knowledge, which the senses can only be an obstacle in acquiring. they can lie, and are hardly accurate. this means the soul is closest to truth and knowledge only when separated from the senses, when in death. he relates how their is an ideal justice, ideal beauty and good, but the senses do not see them, but only apportions of them dictated by the senses. truth on these topics are achieved through logic and the mind, not senses.

in line with this, it's only natural to want to leave the body, the one that needs nature, who desires, who wishes for wealth and war. and stands in the way of the heart of philosophy. death lets us separate the soul and stand closest to truth. but in life the closest one stands is when rejecting such bodily desires such as desire and wealth. obstinance is key. he remarks it's paradoxical that the brave are championed for facing death and beating it, when what can be seen as cowardly, to accept death, is the correct path. Cebes asks then what makes Socrates believe the soul exists after death. after all, most men think the soul vanishes upon death.

Socrates cites the ancient legend of reincarnation, but acknowledges this is just a presumption. he moves on to examine if things must intrinsically come form their opposites, the large must have been small before. he says that all things must follow this relation, with some process separating them. the large are decreased the small increased for example. but if this is so, death and life must have the same relation. and if there is a process from life into death, there must also be one from death into life. to not would make nature lazy not completing the pattern. besides, if everything was to die and there was no return, then how is everyone not dead? this aligns with Socrates' belief that learning is just recollection of what was known in the past life.

Socrates explains his theory as such. we know what equality is like, when two sticks or stones are equal, but we recognise that equal stones doesn't make *the stones* equality itself. we recognise that we are simply sensing the stones as equal, but if our senses are faulty, unable to truly perceive that which we call true equality, where does it come from? it must come from that state which the senses do not blind us in that way, or in essence, a time when the soul and body are separate. death. we simply forget we know these things in birth, and upon relearning them, in essence, recollect them.

but this does not define why the soul exists after life. Socrates cites how the ideal forms are unchanging, the immaterial is perpetual and the material perpetual. as the soul is the immaterial, it follows it should be permanent and thus continue to exist after death. the soul resembles the divine, rulers and the body the mortal, the ruled. he extends that souls of men that live a pure life may escape to the afterlife while those who partake in earthly pleasures and desires have their souls tainted, dragged back to the physical. they become spectres of the earth, unable to pass on and remain to be seen in their soul form. they will possess the physical again, those who were gluttonous becoming hoofed livestock, those who plundered wolves, and those who were virtuous but did not study philosophy social creatures such as bees, wasps or ants, or humans again. those who study philosophy and are pure at death may ascend to company of the gods, and only them.

after a long side tangent Simmias and Cebes voice their concerns. they state something similar to the concept that they accept the soul exists before life, but what is to say it truly exists after death? it may be like an instrument and a harmony, the harmony vanishing when the instrument is destroyed. or perhaps it is as a weaver and a cloak. a weaver may weave many cloaks but die before his last is worn down. he was alive and well before the final cloak, but suddenly was dead, and thus, what if the soul only dies after many bodies and cycles? to rebuke Simmias, he reasons the souls is unlike a harmony, as a harmony is in service and subservient to the physical. a soul must exist above that and be more divine. to tackle Cebes, he detours on his experience with the works of [[Anaxagoras]], perturbed when he used "mind" as a catchall for motion making substance. he never got to *cause* for why things are as they are, why 1 becomes 2 by combination but also separation and such. he thought that cause should be something that "direct everything and arrange each thing in the way that was best".

Plato proceeds to describe the theory of forms in hopes to demonstrate the soul as immortal. he describes that he thinks all things that are beautiful are not beautiful due to being a certain colour or shape, but simply because they all share a connection to The Beautiful. and that the bigger are bigger due to Bigness, and smaller are smaller due to Smallness. in extension, all things that are two must be two by a shared Twoness, and all that is one one by a shared Oneness. the specific beyond this he says are left to men wiser than you. but some men are taller than others, and shorter than others too. so they reside to both belong to the Shortness and the Tallness, so how is this so? he postulates that tihngs can hold many forms, but resolve to a specific form through fleeing or being destroyed. but the Forms themselves can never change or venture to change to their opposite, they themself are eternal. three stones can become 4, but 3 itself will never be even, and odd will never be even itself.

in this framework, the soul gives life to the living, a certain soulness. the opposite of life is death, a certain deathness. under this, soulness can never transfer to deathness, and from that the soul can never become death. thus, the soul must intrinsically be eternal, never suffering death in the same way as the material.

with this discussion of the nature of the soul complete, Socrates moves to the natural sciences. he offers his view of the machinations of the world, but due to this dialogue going under the other name *on the soul* i will pass over this. after this, Socrates goes on to say his time has come, bathes, wishes his friends good lives and reminds them to look after themselves, for they will do no good agreeing with what they have said if they do not. he drinks the poison, his friends crying for losing such a good comrade. he slowly dies, paralysed before passing on.
# General notes
it is noted that in general, this work doesn't align really with the view Socrates held of immortality outlined in such works as [[Apology]] or [[Crito]], or virtues of the soul outlined in [[Euthyphro]], [[Laches]] or [[Protagoras]]. it's commonly held that this depiction of Pythagorean doctrine is not an invention of Socrates that Plato is simply recreating, but Plato's own views using Socrates as mouth piece. in addition Plato directly nods to this being not entirely historical from his own account when Phaedo recounts who was present:
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>
Among the local people there was Apollodorus, whom I mentioned, Critobulus and his father, also Hermogenes, Epigenes, Aeschines and Antisthenes. Ctesippus of Paeania was there, Menexenus and some others. Plato, I believe, was ill.<br>
- Phaedo of Elis (5th Century BCE - 4th Century BCE)
</i></p>

this is the first dialogue I'm reading where I'm like "damn ok so when people say Plato's philosophy is implicit they mean it in that his characters just talk about 'the thing' and you are expected to sorta just understand 'the thing' cause all the characters already know 'the thing'".

i also see in this the seeds of Christianity sowed, in that Plato expounds "if you don't live like me you will be perpetually damned to the cycle, while i go to heaven. do what i say" in such a fatalistic way. this is less a philosophical text as it goes on but more an advertisement for Plato's Orphic sensibilities. 
