## Author
[[Plato]]
## Genres
#Philosophy 
#Dialogue 
[[Epistemology]]
# Summary
Euclides meets Terpsion saying he was down at the harbour to meet Theaetetus, who had returned to Athens from battle in Corinth, befallen with bad wounds and dysentery. he remembered at this time when Socrates met Theaetetus as a boy and was impressed by his natural ability enough to recount his conversation with him to Euclides when returning to Athens. Euclides proceeded to transcribe the conversation to the best of his abilities when returning home and clarified with Socrates over time to completely reconstruct it in written form. Terpsion asks to have the book read to them, Euclides suggesting they rest while a slave reads it.

Socrates meets Theaetetus when speaking to Theodorus, Theodorus speaking of his aptitude. he inquires into Theaetetus with the proposition they shall have to see if Theodorus speaks they truth when he says the 2 of them are quite alike. they begin with the pretence of why Theaetetus lays in the care of Theodorus, to teach him of geometry, astronomy, music and arithmetic. Socrates inquires that learning is a way to become wiser in the subject being learnt by acquiring the wisdom, akin to knowledge. but really is knowledge? Theaetetus respond with astronomy and such, but Socrates reprimands him saying that is an instance of a place where knowledge may lie, but does not answer what knowledge is at it's root. Theaetetus is discouraged that he seems lesser to Socrates but Socrates tells him not to fret since he's getting distraught at being slower than a champion runner. after much deliberation and Socrates comparing himself to a midwife, Theaetetus comes to the conclusion knowledge is perception.

Socrates responds this to be the belief of Protagoras or as "*Man is the measure of all things: of the things which are, that they are, and of the things which are not, that they are not*" or things are as they are seen by each person for how they see them. but what if perceptions do not align, what if the wind is cold to Socrates and not to Theaetetus? is the wind cold and not cold at once? it has to be. he invokes the doctrine of Heraclitus that everything is in flux, that they not being but in a state of becoming. i mean fire comes from movement, things grow, so this logically follows doesn't it? the soul grows and moves by obtaining knowledge, so this theory seems quite solid doesn't it?

Socrates makes the analogy this makes saying white is white nonsense, as the colour itself is constantly changing. and how does one know for sure that every man sees things the same as he? even if a man is constantly changing, can we say he truly continues to see things the same as before as if he was a different man entirely? Socrates says this can lead to quite nonsensical statements, using the example of objects. if you have 6 dice and put 4 dice next to them, the original set is bigger than the second as 6 is greater than 4. but if you had 12 then now the second set is larger). but is there a way for the 6 to become larger than the 12 other than adding more dice? common sense says no, but if things are in flux and constantly moving, you could say there is the possibility the 6 dice *are becoming* larger than the 12, which would be some other way. this is nonsensical.

or what of Socrates and Theaetetus? at the moment Theaetetus is shorter than Socrates but in a year he may stand an inch taller, so Socrates is at once tall and short, all without Theaetetus becoming tall as Heraclitus took that life is never reaching the being but only becoming. this makes Theaetetus' head spin. Socrates says in this framework of things becoming, the act of perception makes things as they are seen. you see a rock that is white, there is a relation in this perception, but what you *see* as white is not really white, but has become white by the perception. it cannot be white as it is always changing. and what of madness? if a man has delusions in this framework they are as being as the rock that is white, as they are perceived as real as each other. no man's perception is better than another's correct? so a deluded man is as sane and well reasoned in their perceptions as a sane one. this is again, nonsense. dreams seem as real as reality from that point of view, but we know they are fiction while reality is fact. this, perception cannot be knowledge if it is so easily deceived.

besides a man can know knowledge without him seeing, as memory exists. if he closes his eyes he still holds such knowledge and thus, does not need to perceive to have knowledge. they are separate. Socrates passes entirely over Parmenides theory that things are static, diametrically opposed to Heraclitus as if to imply he agrees and doesn't want to open himself to criticism and threaten his intellect. Theaetetus moves on that knowledge is true judgements. Socrates begins that people must either know or not know something, ignoring the in-between for now. so when judging, a man either knows or does not know the thing he judges. but a man who knows something must know and judge correctly of those things he knows, and he has no knowledge of things he doesn't know so can't judge them. he also he must know what he knows, so would not mistake things he knows for things he does not or things he does not for things he does. this means, in a sense, it is impossible for a reasonably and knowledgeable person to ever make a false judgement, as he either does not know the thing he is judging or knows it perfectly well. thus Socrates adjusts it slightly, a false judgement does not come when a man does not know what a thing is, but a false judgement comes when a man judges a thing is as it is not.

but Socrates also is unsatisfied with this definition of false judgements. you see what you see and it is nonsensical to suggest a man would ever see what he is not. the same for hearing and the same for touching. in this line, can a man judge something which to him, does not exist? how can one judge something if it does not align with what it is. thus, this also cannot be what a false judgement is. but false judgement *does exist*, this must arise when a man mistakes a thing for another, the ugly for the beautiful or the beautiful for the ugly, and then judges based off that. in a way, a false perception ironically. but Socrates declares this as insanity, no right minded man would confer with the soul and state the ugly is beautiful or beautiful ugly, so this also cannot be true. but there has to be some way to falsely judge still. Socrates says knowledge to be like a wax block in the soul, things leaving the prints in them. Socrates has knowledge of Theaetetus even without the sensing of him at the given point of knowledge. false judgement arises when you know of 2 things, like too figures in the distance and in a rush attribute the wrong sign to each person.

false perceptions come when the wax owing to it's consistency muddles and takes the imprints out of line with what they assign to, thus warping perceptions and misjudgements arising. but this can apply to concepts themselves, some men may muddle 12 with 11 and such, and thus they don't know what they know. this is a problem as it's not so easily solvable as simple misperception of reality. Socrates goes on to make a distinction between *having* and *possessing*. you may not have a coat on but you still possess it, it hanging in your wardrobe. he invokes birds in an aviary, you might say you both have and possess the birds in it. but in another sense he does not *have* them, he has the power to have them at any point but also to let them go and be free in their enclosure again. the aviary is like the soul, full of knowledge one may possess and slowly fills as we learn. learning places a bird in the aviary, but recollection can take the form of hunting that knowledge down again as if you were learning it for the first time.

but Theaetetus rebuts this by suggesting there is also ignorance flying around in the soul that hunters may sometimes catch and mistake for knowledge, being how false judgements occur. Socrates says this means they are back where they started and thus drops the entirely analogy together and returns to the crux that knowledge is true judgements. but Socrates cites lawyers, who's jobs aren't to discover and display the truth but simply persuade the jury to believe and judge their version of events appropriately. the judgement of the jury is correct, or atleast in practice always correct, but it is not based off any knowledge of the truth of the matter, and thus a true judgement was made without accompanying knowledge. Theaetetus thus extends it to true judgements with an account or *logos*. things that can have no account are unknowable and things that can knowable.

but Socrates is left a little unsettled by this still. he take syllables and letters, the first syllable of Socrates is So, which is accountable, and So is made of S and O, which is also accountable. but what are the letters then made of? you cannot say that, and the issue arises from how a proper account must be with entire knowledge. its an argument of if we don't know what the letters are made of do we really understand the syllables? or are they separate entirely. in the end they are not, but in order to understand a syllable then we would have to consider them not made of letters, which is nonsensical.

he third definition Socrates offers is 'being able to tell some mark by which the object you are asked about differs from all other things'. the sun is distinct by it's brightness, but this would mean you need knowledge of the sun before knowledge was attained, creating an endless cycle, so this definition cannot hold. in the end this is the final definition given, as Socrates declares they have made no movement and he must go to the courthouse to defend himself as seen in [[Apology]].
# General notes
it's important to note despite this being a dialogue, it is not a *Socratic dialogue* as it doesn't follow the format of Socrates taking an indifferent position and poking and prodding at a person's understanding to demonstrate their places where they lack understanding and then help them come to a realisation themself.

a specific notes i must make is that Socrates in this example seems to conflate Heraclitus and Protagoras to be men of the same faith and have overlapping beliefs in a way you can simply say they are the same. they in fact were not, which when he does the dice analogy means he disproves Heraclitus in a sense but not so easily Protagoras.

much of Bertrand Russell's chapter on Plato's theory of knowledge dissects this dialogue. see [[History of Western Philosophy#18 Knowledge and Perception in Plato]] but in short a key criticism he levels is this painting of the broad stroke and loosey goosey definition of perception. *some* perceptions can be knowledgeable, but not all, and by disregarding the good perceptions on account of the bad you will fall short of defining all knowledge.