## Author
[[Seneca]]
## Genres
#Philosophy 
#Dialogue 
[[Ethics]]
# Summary
the question of this work concerns the idea that if god exists, why is evil so? why do tragedies befall good men and the wicked and slothful have fortune? Seneca first proposes that god does exist, as the world has some structure and order to it. it may seem random but all things are caused by another in a complex system, there is a reason and an orchestrator for it all. man are following in the footsteps of god, but in order to do that it is necessary to test and harden people. adversity is this test, and a good man is one that stands tall in the face of them. a wrestler trains himself and is eager to wrestle, they do not shy away. it's training, while the slothful remain fat and untrained. look at Cato who died a death that was worthy fighting for his state. his death was one that even those who fear him would acknowledge as noble. Seneca's point broadly is that things deemed as evil, tragedies and death are not evil at all when contextualised as toils and rewards. 

sometimes you must face hardship and toil in order to become better. by amputating a limb you may save the rest of the body for instance. the question is would you rather perish a death faced with a hardship but facing it head on, or live an ignoble life where you are wicked but face no glory. the glory is proportional to the toil, and this means the hardship is worth it. we remember those who overcome a challenge or even perish by it, but do not remember those who languish. in general it is a compliment not a punishment, as to Seneca god and fortune only bestow hardship to those who shall be tested and worth of such a test, and it is your job to rise when tested. a soldier does not complain when sent on a dangerous mission but are thrilled that they are trusted with such a lofty task. so one shall flee safety and luxury and instead try to find such challenges to test and demonstrate their ability, as no one will know your capability if you are never tested. god is testing. such tests make you hardy, should be faced completely with that in mind.

if you face punishments like this from god as such, it no longer is punishment. you cannot steal what is being handed to you gladly, god is not stealing a life that was already his and being offered back to him. so you shall do this, by facing hardship head on given to you by god you offer your life back to him, and either die or live on stronger. you have control of this outcome, and so decide that fate. those that appear as fortunate but do not act upon that fortune are creatures of vanity, under it they are as untrained as they deserve to be and base. it is not a blessing but a curse to live as such, as they are not people of their full potential. and besides, no man is born as poor as they were born, pain is either relieved or ends you, death either ends or transfers you. there is no point postulating beyond that. and if you do not wish to face hardship, you always have a way out easy to you. death is but a moment, yet you fear it as such?
# General notes
Seneca's point throughout is god tests us and as such what appears as evil is not so as long as you rise to it. this is noble but also seemingly an excuse of retroactively coping that bad things happen to good people because in a backwards way they deserve to have their entire family die. its an unsympathetic, masochistic doctrine and apologia against the idea people can mourn or be upset at misfortune.