## Director
[[Hideaki Anno]]
[[Mahiro Maeda]]
[[Kazuya Tsurumaki]]
[[Katsuichi Nakayama]]
## Writer
[[Hideaki Anno]]
## genres
#Action 
#Drama 
#Mecha 
#Psychological 
#Sci-Fi 
# Story
THE ANGELS THEY TAKE FRANCE. THIS IS JUST LIKE THE NAZIS.
they take back le France. Shinji and Asuka and rei walk and eventually call Toji who comes get them. Toji patches Shinji up and gives him some clothes. Shinji is a little bitch and mopes around after all that has happened. Toji and the class rep got married and have a kid, much to the curiosity of rei. Toji and Kensuke try to cheer Shinji up but he refuses to let them in. Kensuke invites Shinji to stay with him, which Asuka is aswell. she comments how Shinji doesn't get flustered when he sees her naked, as honestly by this point he is too broken and traumatised from seeing Kaworu die that he simply doesn't react. he notices the choker around Asuka's neck, probably a contingency for the angel in her eye and begins to chuck simply from remembering Kaworu. he cries himself to sleep, being woken up by asuka in the morning.

Rei begins to learn what it means to have hope, live beyond orders and only what you are told to do (you dont need a reason to live or exist given to you, you can find it yourself or in the interaction with others). asuka berates shinji for being so weak, how he runs and should think about why she tried to punch him. hes so caught up in how everything goes wrong but refuses to take responsibility and try to fix it, he is just moping around. he leaves aimlessly wandering before coming to a building. Rei goes to Asuka to find where Shinji is, but she tells her she is programmed to want to be with him, but she doesnt care about that. she goes and finds shinji and gives him back his music player, but he throws it away. she gives him some food and then says she will come back later.

toji is worried aobut Shinji, but Kensuke tells him to not worry about it so much, Shinji will come around. Rei asks why shinji is isolating himself, responding that he isnt protecting anything, he destroyed everything and he doesn't to talk or be around people, he just wants to be alone. but why is everyone kind to him? rei tells it because they like him, and thanks him for talking to her. Shinji sobs, returning to Kensuke's house. Asuka chastises him but he just doesn't respond. he goes out with Kensuke to do maintenance, telling him to catch some fish. Shinji protests but is told to try then he can say he can't do it.

rei begins to be integrated into the village, the class rep telling her to stay with them. she asks Shinji to give her a name, since she needs one but he insists she isn't rei, but she says any name will do. rei begins to deteriorate, needing LCL exposure to stay together. Shinji asks Toji about what he missed, being told they all did things they aren't proud of. Shinji has already done enough for everyone, saving them from the angels, he doesn't need to worry about trying to fix anything. just accept the life he can have with them, that's ok. Kensuke takes Asuka and Shinji to see his fathers grave, encouraging Shinji to go talk to his father so he doesn't regret unsaid words like Kensuke does for his father.

Shinji is taken to meet Kaji's son, also named Ryoji Kaji. Misato abandoned him as a kid to try to protect him by working at WILLE, as she feels unworthy of motherhood. Kaji died to stop near 3rd impact, and Misato feels guilt on placing more baggage on Shinji, in a way she doesn't want him to pilot cause it risk just more being put on him. everyone is struggling in their own ways, and that's ok. Shinji reflects on Kaji before heading back to Kensuke's. reis state worsens, a red hole opening on her hand. she begins crying but is unable to rationalise why. she leaves a note for Toji and the class rep, wishing them in a way a good life before going to meet Shinji at the abandoned building. he finally accepts her to be rei, not another person, because in the end the rei he knows is gone and the one before him is one he can accept. she thanks him, before explaining that she cant live where they are. she likes where they are. but she is grateful she did get to live for a bit. she wanted to live more, work, meet people and be with Shinji but that's not possible. she becomes LCL as Shinji realises what's happening.

Wunder arrives to get Shinji and Asuka. Shinji goes to Kensuke, telling him he is going to go with Asuka after all, finally accepting he can do something. Sakura slaps him for piloting an eva again but cries. they give him no choker as they are going to lock him up while the final operation is underway. the crew debate Shinji's status, some feel him not deserving a second chance while others acknowledging he didn't plan to cause an impact. Asuka says Shinji doesn't need a lover, he needs a mother to look after him. Ritsuko explains to Misato that the Wunder is an ark to maintain the life from earth for another chance on another planet, all a plan of Kaji. but he didn't need to because he was able to stop 3rd impact by sacrificing himself.

Fuyutsuki asks if Gendo is purposefully tormenting Shinji like he was, but he doesn't respond. Ritsuko tells Misato she doesn't have to stoic, she knows she is happy Shinji came back, Misato reflects on Shinji and he's situation before being told they are ready to launch. Asuka and Mari prepare as Asuka asks if Shinji now knows why she tried to punch him, responding it was because he failed to make a decision or act, he didn't kill her or save her because he wanted to escape responsibility. asuka admits she may have had a crush on shinji but not now, she matured while he stayed stagnant. shinji is left as Mari and Asuka go to do the operation, but Asuka is absorbed into unit 13 after its hinted that she is simply a clone. gendo appears and is revealed to have abandoned his humanity and became a cild of adam or somethin then makes unit 13 consume the S2 engine within asuka's angel inside her. the 4th impact begins. the second impact purified the ocean, the 3rd the earth and now the 4th the poeple. humans have 2 choices, kill or be killed. exterinated or rise up against the gods. gendo takes unit 1 back as shinji tries to speak to him, but he ignores him and simple continues the 4th impact. shinji enters unit 1 and goes into the golgotha object to fight his father. eventually he gets his shit kicked in and his father tells him they can only win by conversation.

meanwhile back in reality WILLE work to create a new spear for shinji to use if needed.  shinji is shown evangelion imaginary, an eva that is imaginary and fictional, only existing to humanity that can believe in fantasy and reality. the despair and hope feed off each other. anno brought him here because he wants to show him the world he wants, one with yui, but he cant find yui. he has an AT field as he is afraid of shinji, of connecitng to his son. you see grew up very similar to shinji, he desired knowledge and lonliness. misato rams into the big real rei and fucking dies.

# Notes
- the movie very obviously has a theme of the next generation, moving on, letting others take the mantle when your time is over. fuck ton of babies in the movie.
- i... don't really vibe with the idea near 3rd could have ""had good come out of it". like it was set up to be Shinji must take responsibility, and good things **can** come from bad events but i should be saying that opposed to the text itself, it undercuts the message a bit.
- there is a duality to how Shinji is treated by Kaworu and Asuka. Kaworu helps Shinji by challenging him and telling him its ok to want to progress but to do that you just have to keep trying. Asuka simply berates him, she does help but its not the healthy way to go about it to force it on him.
- rei begins to come out of her shell by not isolating herself, while Shinji and Asuka don't progress or become better by isolating them. you rarely see Shinji and Asuka not alone.
- life cant just be good times, you need to accept the bad with the good like the class rep says.
- the "I'm home" line is so powerful cause its mirroring something that only happened in the original series. it means Shinji finally feels accepted or appreciated by the people around him.
- Shinji gets over his trauma with rei, knowing now moping won't get him anywhere
- Shinji's response to why Asuka tried to punch him might answer the ambiguity of EoE. Shinji didn't choke her in the end because doing so means he would have to acknowledge taking a life, he gave everyone the choice of living so he cant then back out by killing Asuka. but he doesn't want to let her in either, take responsibility for how he feels and how it can hurt him and others, so he decided to not kill her and do nothing.
- to ficiton their ficiton is our non ficiton. that is what evangelion imaginary is.
- yui and rei are like the eva in anno mind and the real one.
- look you cant take notes on gendo cause you just watch that section you know which one for the notes its just anno but its you and me and everyone we are all shinji and gendo is also shinji and its a cylce and we break that cylce.
- so mari knew gendo too, and set him up with yui.