## Author
[[Daniel Kahneman]]
## Genre
#Psychology

# Chapters
## Introduction 
there wasn't really any thing specific cited in here that is worth taking note of in terms of the books topic, it being more a general overview of the conditions and response that the initial research was done in, with some thought experiments such as the librarian vs farmer fallacy.
## Part I. Two Systems
### 1. The Characters of the Story
thinking can be primary split into two systems, system 1 being quick and instinctual thinking such as recognising facial expressions and system 2 which need more effortful attention such as complex computations.
#### System 1 Examples
- Detect that one object is more distant than another.
- Orient to the source of a sudden sound.
- Complete the phrase “bread and …”
- Make a “disgust face” when shown a horrible picture.
- Detect hostility in a voice.
- Answer to 2 + 2 = ?
- Read words on large billboards.
- Drive a car on an empty road.
- Find a strong move in chess (if you are a chess master).
- Understand simple sentences.
- Recognize that a “meek and tidy soul with a passion for detail” resembles an occupational stereotype.
this list doesn't match the initial expectations, some things you think would be mentally taxing with enough exposure become engrained into system 1 and automatic.
#### System 2 Examples
- Brace for the starter gun in a race.
- Focus attention on the clowns in the circus.
- Focus on the voice of a particular person in a crowded and noisy room.
- Look for a woman with white hair.
- Search memory to identify a surprising sound.
- Maintain a faster walking speed than is natural for you.
- Monitor the appropriateness of your behaviour in a social situation.
- Count the occurrences of the letter a in a page of text.
- Tell someone your phone number.
- Park in a narrow space (for most people except garage attendants).
- Compare two washing machines for overall value.
- Fill out a tax form.
- Check the validity of a complex logical argument.
some of these tasks can be transitioned to System 1, but through repeated exposure and effort
#### Interactions Between the Systems
system 1 will plod along until it notices something system 2 is needed for, handing it off to system 2. this can be a bless or a cause, system 1 is good at what it does but is prone to problems around logic and stats, meaning it may be a bit overconfident in its peformance.
### 2. Attention and Effort
when you put in effort, i.e. activate system 2, you will suffer from blindness from any stimulus that isnt required for the ffort.
### 3. The Lazy Controller
like mentioned before, the system 1 can be very lazy and easily influenced. there is a direct correlation with impulsive actions and relying heavily on system 1 thinking.
### 4. The Associative Machine
System 1 is prone to suggestion through association, such as banana and vomit illicitng bad vibes, you being more likely to respond soap when asked to complete so_p when shown wash opposed to soup, or by thinking of old people acting old and vice versa.
### 5. Cognitive Ease
if something is simple to parse or easy to remember, we are more likely to take it on face value or jump to intuition, with the reverse also working. word problems in shit font will be correctly answered more often as parsing a bad font activates system 2 and overrides the gut feeling of system 1.
### 6. Norms, Surprises, and Causes
we as people have inherent ideas of norms ie connecting two events together to derive a cause. this is predominantly a system 1 task so it can be prone to some faulty logic but also inference such as abstract story telling with only shapes.
### 7. A Machine for Jumping to Conclusions
we as people are prone to jump to conclusions, the order you present info such as marking 2 papers or the absence of opposing information can make you more certain and influence how you feel about a certain thing. this is down to the fact that rationalising these things come down to a lazy System 2 and an overconfident System 1.
### 8. How Judgements Happen
System 1 will make judgements that will drastically effect our System 2 answers. you will base your political opinions of a person on how well they dress, or when asked to indicate if a sentence is literally true will have a delay still when presented with a metaphorically true sentence as your brain is still firing despite it not being relevant.
### 9. Answering an Easier Question
linking back to chapter 7, our brains will try to make answering complex questions easier by substituting it for an easier question, which also could be generated by our brains jumping to a conclusion. if you are asked about happiness and then your love life there is no correlation, but primed with an emotional question first the correlation becomes strong. this is weird as this is predominantly the disciplined system 2, but it seems when it comes to feelings and attitudes, System 2 can be a slave for system 1 when it should be the opposite.
## Part II. Heuristics and Biases
### 10. The Law of Small Numbers
the law of small numbers states that we extend the reliability of large samples to smaller samples than really deserve it. a common stat is small schools and classes perform better, but this is due to statistical anomalies, they also perform worse and are generally just more variable. in general this rule makes us focus on one side when in fact the stats could say the opposing idea than you are focusing on (rural cancer rates are both lower and higher).
### 11. Anchors
anchors are priming suggestions in the way that system 1 will use it as ball park (if you ask if someone died over 144 and then their exact age you are more likely to get answers close to that initial figure) but also system 2 will use it as a starting point to adjust it down or up to a more reasonable answer, so if you start higher or lower people tend to also end higher or lower,
### 12. The Science of Availability
if you find something more mentally available, you are more likely to think its true. if you find it hard to think of instances where say you are assertive, you are more likely to say you aren't, which is funny cause if asked for 6, if those 6 come easier than 12 then the people asked to give 6 will rate themselves on average more assertive.
### 13. Availability, Emotion, and Risk
due to the previous mentioned availability heuristic, it can drastically effect our estimates of how likely events are and risks. terrorism and accidents are exceedingly as unlikely as say disease and medical conditions but as they are more emotional as being a sudden and drastic event we believe them to be more likely. events can play to emotions to make us overstate their prominence and media can play to this; an availability cascade to make non-events events.
### 14. Tom W's Speciality
if asked about general university admission, people would most likely follow admission rates for different fields to decide the most likely. but if primed with a person's description you can drastically effect how likely you are to see them in a certain profession. this is known as representativeness, the propensity for a statement to make you ignore hard statistics and focus on what may be an unreliable description. Bayesian statistics is a much better option but people are less likely to gravitate towards it as a method when asked such a simple question, it seems simple enough to just answer off the cuff.
### 15. Linda: Less is More
in some cases if primed, people will believe a far smaller sample size is more probably than an obviously larger one (such as the smaller set being entirely in the larger one (such as being a bank teller and a bank teller and a feminist if primed with the personality that matches a feminist))
### 16. Causes Trump Statistics
people will relies on causal, story based stats and evidence more than base rates, as its just easier to understand and rely on. this goes the other way that people will be surprised when the reverse happens, stories prime them to expect a certain outcome.
### 17. Regression to the Mean
good performance above the mean is usually due to luck and will go back the next measurement, and bad performance will go up. you can fight this intuitive overestimate by adding some correlation between two events such how much talent and luck effects performance.
### 18. Taming Intuitive Predictions
do the above
## Part III. Overconfidence
### 19. The Illusion of Understanding
refer to [[The Black Swan; The Impact of the Highly Improbable]]
### 20. The Illusion of Validity
people can be shown their skills is not very good, evaluate slightly better than guesses but still near guessing but still feel like they are valid in doing this. this is the illusion of validity, a cognitive version of that lines being the same experiment. but when you learn the lines are the same length, you can report that despite not seeing that, cognitive illusions aren't so easy to shape.
### 21. Intuitions vs Formulas
intuitions from even experts has a tendency to perform worse than a naïve formula, human intuition makes us over think problems, but also we can just be unreasonable and illogical in judgements.
### 22. Expert Intuition: When can we Trust it?
in the end you can trust experts who work in predictable fields and are given ample time to adapt to that predictability. you can also become an expert in identifying experts, over time relying more on system 1 like chess masters learn moves.
### 23. The Outside View
people will usually fail to acknowledge other instances of similar projects not working out due to optimism and perhaps sunk costs on their current one. it also exhibits something called the planning fallacy, where people will for the most part plan for the ideal scenario that could be improved with consulting similar cases but are not due to optimism.
### 24. The Engine of Capitalism
optimistic people will drastically overestimate their success rate. this is generally how they succeed against stacked odds but also how so many fail. the best way to combat this is to put measures in place where you are forced to consider failure, but you cant exactly force system 1 to not fall for this.
## Part IV. Choices
### 25. Bernoulli's Errors
Bernoulli's theory of principle states that money isn't the important thing in changes but the percentage gained or loss. an issue is people don't value chances if their wealth is drastically different.
### 26. Prospect Theory
most people wont follow statistical returns but instead be incredibly risk adverse, meaning that it takes a very large change in percentage of wealth for people to actually take a risk. this is only applies when a choice isn't drastically more lucrative than its alternatives, in that case the risk become straightforward to take.
### 27. The Endowment Effect
people will hold onto what they have even if offered something which is meant to have the same utility.
### 28. Bad Events
on a psychological level we are built to avoid bad events, even showing people negative stimuli for a fraction of a second and they will exhibited heightened threat recognition. this ties back as risk adversity is this exact phenomena, trying to avoid a negative risk and thus we are built to be risk adverse. people on average try to uphold fairness, even if its paradoxical to traditional economist literature. people think it is unfair to impose a loss on employees or customers, reducing a persons wage to 7 dollars an hour is unfair but hiring a new person for that role for that wage is not. buying an item only to find it had before purchase or after purchase a lower price reduces your chance of being a returning customer, as you feel that you were ripped off unfairly.
### 29. The Fourfold Pattern
|  | GAIN | LOSSES |
| :--: | :--: | :--: |
| HIGH<br>PROBABILITY<br>Certainty Effect | 95% chance to win $10,000<br>Fear of disappointment<br>RISK ADVERSE<br>Accept unfavourable settlement | 95% chance to lose $10,000<br>Hope to avoid loss<br>RISK SEEKING<br>Reject favourable settlement |
| LOW<br>PROBABILITY<br>Possibilty Effect | 5% chance to win $10,000<br>Hope of large gain<br>RISK SEEKING<br>Reject favourable settlement | 5% chance to lose $10,000<br>Fear of large loss<br>RISK ADVERSE<br>Accept unfavourable settlement |
### 30. Rare Events
black swan stuff
### 31. Risk Policies
people are adverse to some risk individually but ok with it together, which makes little sense
### 32. Keeping Score
we are very simply creatures, sunk cost fallacy effects us hard. we can feel regret and thus avoid situations we may regret in the end, but also cause us to have the same thing happen to us as others and regret it more if we avoid it more, making a self fulfilling prophecy. responsibility can also be a big part as you feel a greater burden and fear of regret for things you consciously let happen than just so happened to have the chance to you, even if the events leading to the same outcome have the same chance of occurring.
### 33. Reversals
sometimes when we combine two outcomes, suddenly we will reappraise and switch the relative value of the two things (usually due to emotion)
### 34. Frames and Reality
how info is frame can drastically effect our choices or our itnutions (a bad unit such as mpg instead of gpm)
## Part V. Two Selves
### 35. Two Selves
there are 2 wolves inside you
1 is rational and evaluates pain and stimuli properly
1 is retarded and would endure 30 seconds of extra pain only cause it was less painful for it compared to the preceding pain
### 36. Life as a Story
we tend to put heavy emphasis on the end of experiences and such to evaluate how they were, especially memories. most people would not say a vacation was good if told they would forget all the experiences form that vacation after the fact. people also are indifferent to the idea of taking a medication to forget a traumatic experience, despite the fact they experienced it since the remembering self isn't the one suffering.
### 37. Experienced Well-Being
the experience of positive experience has a mismatch with our actual general well-being, you can be positive in negative environments and vice versa. think money cant buy happiness, if you are poor you are miserable but being rich wont necessarily stop you being miserable.

### 38. Thinking About Life
the focusing illusion (focusing on a certain aspect of experience) can make us under or overestimate our wellbeing or peoples wellbeing in that situation (i.e. climate doesn't effect us but people think it does so we get too focused on it)
