## Director
[[Ryuutarou Nakamura]]
## Writer
[[Chiaki Konaka]]
## genres
#Drama 
#Mystery 
#Psychological 
#Sci-Fi 
#Supernatural 
#denpa 

# Episodes
## Episode 01 
Summary - you see shots of inner city Tokyo, a girl asking why someone wont come to her and she wishes they would. you see the girl pant and breakdown as people simply laugh at her, obviously being under age. you see text saying that the reason you should do it you should determine for yourself. the girl goes to a roof top, posing strangely and muttering she doesn't need to stay in a place like this before jumping. a  couple is present as she hits shit on the way down and died.

if you stay in a place like this you might not be able to connect, as Lain leaves home to head to school. she curses the racket people make on the trains and tells them to shut up before getting to school and very much hallucinating shit. she sits down in class as a student weeps. a girl asks if lain got an email from Yomada Chisa, but lain says she isn't very good with computers. Chisa killed herself last week yet people are receiving emails from her after her death. during class the teacher writes c code on the board but it goes over Lain's head. she starts hallucinating an aura emanating from her finger tips as she contemplates what dying is like. she comes home but her family aren't home yet. she takes off her school uniform before fishing out her computer and connecting to the wired. she had received an email from Chisa, talking of the time they once walked home together. she says she only gave up her body, but is still alive in the wired. lain asks why she died, only being told that god is here.

lain has dinner with her family, telling her mother she got the email she did, but her mum doesn't really care. her dad gets home and works on his computer, installing a new part he just received.  she asks if he can buy her a new navi, or computer. he laughs at her having caught the bug, then logs in and immediately falls in to the wired and looks manic navigating it. he says both the real world and wired are the same, people connect to each other. you see anonymous figures. lain says she just wants to see a friend, her dad laughing manically.

the next day the train lain catches suddenly stops, being told there to be an accident . lain looks out the window and sees blood dripping from over head wires outside. you see her mindlessly walk around, going about her day in a daze. she imagines being on a train track, a train coming towards her in the mist. she sees a figure approach the rail, lain crying out to not jump in front of the train, before the train speeds past and hits the person. lain had been dreaming in class, chastised by her teacher for not paying attention. she struggles to focus before the writing on the board forming "come to the wired as soon as you can". she sees Chisa on the way home, asking where she is. she only smiles and disappears.

Notes - yeah this anime is as weird as i remember.
## Episode 02 
late night Tokyo, in a club a man is given a drug, Accela, a nanomachine that the man then swallows. his vision begins to swirl, foaming at the mouth. time slows down to him, noticing the many people through the club. he sees a girl that looks like lain yelling at a man she'd knocked down.

lain checks her email, her sister commenting on how lain is talking to herself, thinking Lain's imaginary friend was here. lain leaves for school, walking the same way she has countless times before, but stops when she sees a man down the road watching her. girls from her class meet her on the way, talking about how "it couldn't have been her", most likely referring to the lain in the club. they tell lain about the girl at Cyberia, someone that looked like her but was her polar opposite. she gets invited out by Alice to Cyberia, but declines for tonight. she hallucinates spectral mfs in the school, and a person like she saw on the tracks the previous episode, between a smile and scream as they phase through her and disappear..

when she gets home a man is waiting at her home saying they have a delivery for her. her father had ordered her a new navi, being a top of the line which allows you to traverse the wired with no stresses. she sits in her room in silence until her dad gets home, for some reason her mother being quite intimate before realising lain is there and snapping at her to clean up the delivery soon. her dad says he'll set it up after diner but lain insists he do it now, looking obsessed with the idea. he does, saying she'll be the talk of her friends now. as he leaves her room her sister walks up to the door, only sighing as he asks what's wrong. lain eventually gets pressured into going to Cyberia. while in the club someone starts shooting shit, lain freezing up as she sees the gunman has shot 2 women. the gunman is the man from the beginning of the episode. he asks why she is making him do this, he doesn't know anything about or any thing to do with it. the wired shouldn't interfering with the real world. lain goes autism mode and tells him he cant escape that everyone is connected, before he turns the gun on himself. 

## Episode 03
the club is evacuated as a voice over asks if you have heard of "lain of the wired". lain remembers the incident while at the police station. they can't get in contact with her parent but Lain's general quiet manner is irking the officer. Alice comes in and reassures lain saying its their fault she was there. she quickly leaves, being told to go by presumably her parents. the police get a car to drive lain home as she enters her house with it being dark and empty. she goes to her parents? room to find them not there, her Navi on and beckoning to her. she approaches it, using it before dozing off, waking up and then going to look for her family again. she goes back and checks her messages, seeing that no one has contacted her. she says goodbye to her navi, it responding making lain momentarily look back. she goes to sleep in her bear onesie.

she wakes up to find her mother making breakfast, chastising lain for waking up and being late for school. she goes to ask her mum about yesterday but decides against it. she leaves for school, finding a black car parked outside her house. a red dot appears on the tint, causing lain to run to the train. lain begins hearing a voice on the train, telling her she isn't alone. she enters class, finding the girl gossiping about the events of yesterday. it doesn't seem like allice and co were very phased by it. Alice approaches Lain smiling as the others continue to gossip. in class Lain hears Chisa saying there was no reason for her to keep being in the real world, she didn't matter in the real world, that made her not afraid of losing her body. who is lain?

Alice contests to the weirdness of their reaction, but it just didn't seem real to them. meanwhile lain finds a letter in her shoe locker, the girls making fun of her for thinking its a love letter. they snatch it, Alice telling them off. they find some device (presumably a tracker from the looks of it) in it. on the way home lain suddenly freezes, saying "psyche".

lain is exposed to many different boards on the wired, people discussing the events that occurred at Cyberia and how it sent the black market in to a spin. they mention a "psyche chip", some rumoured item that is mass produced in Taiwan by a group known as The Knights. she finds instances of suicide forums and drug stories aswell as black mail. Chisa asks why lain wont come to the wire with her as she receives an email. her dad checks on her and how she is going with her new Navi. she asks her dad what the item is, her dad saying he doesn't know but then gets very standoffish and suddenly leaves. lain goes out but the same car is waiting outside her house with the red dots. she returns to Cyberia, seeing two people making out before entering. she gets recognised by some punk, telling her she is really going for the young girl look today and they should have another rave. lain recognises the kids from yesterday, asking them if they know anything about the object. they look surprised, thinking it to be a Psyche chip. they pull out some gun thing and explain that with that they could access the wired basically anywhere. she asks how she installs it, them explaining how to install it to her navi. sone of the guys suddenly changes his disposition when she says she  is in eighth grade and starts stink eyeing her. he calls out lain, saying he saw her in the wired, but she was completely different in there. when asked for payment for the info, the kid tells her to go on a date with him, but with the wired lain. he backs off saying it was a joke before the group storm off and leave.

Lain's sister walks past the car home the next day to find 2 men standing at their door. she asks their business, them saying she didn't seem them there leaving. she tries to talk to her mum but she doesn't listen. she peeks into Lain's room, finding her taking a part her navi in her underwear. she doesn't believe it before lain smiles to the camera and says welcome home.

## Episode 04 
some girl is saying she doesn't need parents, people aren't connected to each other. lain is now deep in her Navi, having taken apart multiple parts of it and reading books on how to improve it. her father looks in with some level of concern, before just shrugging it off and leaving her alone. Lain's express concern for lain, but her father shrugs it off as just being normal. a man is seen running from someone, appearing to be a young girl before screaming and running towards his apartment. he struggles with the keys before looking back and seeing a young girl with a plushie. he demands to know what's happening and what they want with him as the kid appears behind him, smiling and saying "gotcha" in an adult's voice before the man screams.

the next day a special staff meeting was called, the girls discussing it. Alice tells them it may be due to an older student committing suicide. there has been a chain of suicides it seems, Allice calling on lain that seems more engrossed in a textbook than the conversation. she says she knows a little about the suicide, saying she found out on the wired. she tells them its some sort of game it seems, all the kids who killed themselves being hooked on it. she asks if they are ok with her going home, she wants to put her navi back together, the girls saying it seems like she is more interested in a computer than her friends. they let her go, but Alice tells her to let them come over some time. Alice comments she has changed as she runs off, as she bumps into the kid who killed the guy, but the kid is completely normal. 

lain logs into the wired, her room full of computer parts now and checks her mail. she gets mail from a guy she contacted about her Psyche chip advising how she should set it up, but there may be bugs and don't be afraid to ask him for more info. at Cyberia Lain asks JJ about the game, telling her its called Phantoma, but she wouldn't be interested in it as its not a game for adults, before turning around with lain not even being there. a boy runs form something, seeing visions of a computer maze game, being approached by a figure resembling lain in her nightgown. he runs, smashing a handheld computer on the ground before seeing a perspective of traversing a ps1 low poly maze. he says it isn't the wired so why is it happening before the voice of lain tells him to stop running. he asks if she is a "PK (Player Killer)" before she says he cant go to where he is. he sees glowing hand prints before turning around to find a young girl grimacing before pulling a face. he loads an imaginary gun and shoots the kid, the kid loosing its face as they fall to the ground from the gun fire. sheets are strewn across the roof top, bodies appearing to be inside them as the boy looks on with a traumatised look on his face. a glowing lain looks on, looking troubled in the direction of the boy.

he says he was scared, he didn't know it was a girl and its not his fault. he explains that Phantoma is a game on the wired that lets you fight other players in a dungeon like game mode. lain proceeds to close Phantoma as she gets another email, telling her the normal game isn't that weird for the wired. the problem is the API that lets it connect to other programs most likely set up by the Knights. as she launches the game her dad walks in and reminds her the wired is just a means of info and communication, don't confuse it for the real world. she tells him he's wrong, the boundary isn't that well defined. soon she will be able to enter it, full motion and model of herself. no civilian Navi should be capable, but she has modified hers with the Psyche chip. but don't worry, she will still be herself. he simply leaves and lain returns to her Navi, falling deeper into the Wired. as she browses she hears again a voice asking why she wont come to the wired before a red dot begins going across her room. she notices men outside when she looks out the window, the dots zeroing in on her. she tells them to go away, as they smile. she says again as a wave explodes out and destroys one of their headsets. they run as the navi says "intruder interrupted".
## Episode 05
### Summary 
humans have an exceedingly low rate of cancer, so have they stopped evolving? simply to live for the folly of their desires, and only for that. you can escape that body into the wired. lain hears this, from a voice claiming to be god. Lain's sister leaves her boyfriends?? to head home. she crosses the street but sees a car speed through a crowd, but she simply walks off. Lain speaks to her dolls asking to be told a story. and then it starts speaking to her, asking what type. she responds one she doesn't know about, but is told she knows everything, so thus cannot be told a story that cannot exist. the doll compromises that she will tell her a prophecy of an upcoming event, events only come about because of prophecies. a news report says the road traffic information system sent out incorrect information, singles interfering and causing a crash. lain walks home and is given a package by a man with a rainbow on it, before walking off. her sister appears from the crowd and is given the same item, but just scoffs. a kid hits on her before she tries to walk off but gets his soft drink on her sleeve, before running off. she takes out the package and pulls out the napkin to find it has written on it "the other side is overcrowded. the dead will have no place to go". she scrunches it up, thinking it to just be a bad joke. she follows a crowd forming and sees lain standing out in the street with cars driving past, as she looks up to a screen above the crossing and sees lain looking down.

the next day at school Alice and the girls congratulate lain for doing such a "good hacking stunt". she doesn't know what they are talking about. its theorised that the road information system wasn't effected by signals but was hacked deliberately to make it error. Alice and co discuss how Alice is getting spam mail about fulfilling a prophecy. word on the wired is its related to the knights. lain keeps hallucinating, seeing her mother tell her the wired is the upper layer of the world, physical reality is just an illusion from the info funnelled through the wired, like how we can only rely on electrical impulse in the brain to prove the world exists. Lain's sister confronts her about seeing her in the cross roads, but just brushes it off when lain doesn't give an immediate response. she suddenly appears in Shibuya surrounded by cars. the crowds around her become shadowy figures. she comes back in a diner surrounded by high school kids and people, physically shaken by it. she knocks over her coffee, the coffee moving and forming the worlds "fulfil the prophecy". she asks what prophecy before everyone disappears. she runs to a bathroom, with the lights going out and a door creaking. she opens the door, finding no one in there and the lights come back on. the door shuts behind her, the words fulfil the prophecy written on its back. she races home and kneels down in front of the front door, before seeing herself walk into the hall. with that the version we follows disappears. lain asks what's wrong, her sister saying nothing at all in a weird way before going to her room. lain looks where she was and sees a shimmering figure, frowning.

lain returns to her room, now full of screens and computer equipment before saying "who will it be today".
### Notes 
- LAIN IS TLP
- the real world interacts with the wired and vice versa. there is god in the real world but there must also be a god of the wired, its prophetical to the idea of worlds.

## Episode 06 
Lain's father stands outside her room, seeing the blue glow from her navi. he approaches and knocks, he tells her he's coming in, noticing the floor is wet. her navi has become a goliath, water cooled with electrical equipment everywhere. she doesn't even notice her dad entered. in the wired she says she already verified that register and asks for other suggestions. a muffled voice says something and she just laughs. she keeps talking with response before she says she doesn't have many friends, then thanks the knights.

lain walks to school, seeing a kid raising his arms and looking up at something. she follows his gaze, and when she looks back he's gone. when she gets to school her friends confront her says it seems like she's avoiding her. they don't want her to be alone but she tells them she isn't alone, she sees people on the wired. Reika says net friends don't count. they ask what she's been doing on the wired and she says its a secret. the girls help lain get an outfit and they go out, going to get ice cream. on the way they see another kid like the one before. throughout the city lain sees kids to keep doing the same thing. lain ha s a vision that they are praising her, parting in the clouds. but it isn't just Lain's vision, it seems people all around her can see it. it then disappears when lain looks away.

Lain's mother talks to Lain's sister, saying she comes home early now and lain is out till late. her sister seems comatose just going along with it as lain arrives home and goes to her room. the wired is talking about the incident she saw, saying it unsettled witnesses before lain connects to the wired. lain talks to some guy who only manifests as a mouth, commending lain for being able to manifest fully. she tells him to shut up, calls him a Cheshire cat wannabe and then asks what's the deal with the game kids are playing. lain does a search and finds  the child killer scientist, an old man waiting to die on a private hospital ward. the mouth tells her to ask him about KIDS. she then asks the professor about it directly through the wired.

lain appears in a space with an old man reclined. he remarks she looks lifelike, but lain just asks about KIDS. the doctor is in his own head, remarking about how peaceful it is here but lain insists to see the experiment data from 15 years ago, as well as the current game that kids are playing, replicating the experiment. he thought he had erased all about it, about the Kensington experiment. kids have PSI, but not as strong as ESP. lain is shown footage of kids connected to Outer Receptors, to connect to the PSI. the experiment aimed to amass kids ability to make one completely stronger whole. but all it did was kill the kids, causing the doctor to destroy the machine and destroy its data. but schematics somehow ended up on the wire and someone else recreated. hey modified it to not need the outer receptors, most likely making the feedback loop impossible. lain asks if he knows who did the new one, but he says he is tired but it was nice to meet her. he also wonders who is recreating it, calling them rogues. lain suddenly realises something (most likely the knights are responsible), before the doctor dies in the real world.

back in the real world lain tells the navi to shut up. she asks who it is she is talking to and what they want to achieve. is she just a toy and it a game, hurting young kids? she calls the knights losers and makes fun of them for not responding to her. she looks at the ceiling as she sees the same red lasers enter her room the men from before had, looking out the window to see them standing there again. lain says she "gets it" and runs out into the street to confront them in person. she says they must be the knights, before they tell lain to get down as her computer explodes. they tell her they must have planted a parasite bomb in her coolant system before leaving, saying the knights must have been responsible.
## Episode 07
WE LIVE IN A SOCIETY.

outside Lain's window wires are hanging out a hole in the wall like guts. lain says that's wrong she is just watching as "it" becomes less like her when she goes into the wired. her sister watches her. she stammers as lain asks what's wrong, Mika just closing the door and leaving.

some guy walks around the streets wearing weird wired shit saying the real world and wired are connected, he can release his consciousness anywhere he wants or any time he wants. a secretary comes into a mans office and informs him about the EMA Motor Consortium banquet. he tells her to tell them he'll be done in 3 minutes, the secretary leaving. he opens his mail to find a symbol, asking what game they want to play this time. in class lain is fixated on her portable navi, worrying Alice. a fat man uses the wired, the same symbol showing up. he tells them to try him, he's better an all of them. Alice finds lain on a roof, asking if she's ok. they wan to include her and make her happy, that's all. but when she implies she may think they are a nuisance to her, she tells her its not like that at all, she has had fun. Alice takes her hand, lain thanking her for worrying about her. Alice runs off as lain smiles.

a news report on the wired says the fire wall of the information control centre was hacked by some part. the wired is thus in disarray. despite this its being broadcast on the wired so may be received tomorrow, or perhaps the day before. on the wired people discuss the knights and lain, saying lain is powerful because of her metamorphosis and existence. the navi delivery guy flirts with the woman he is delivering a navi to, before her son gets home. she takes out the new part, it being a circuit board with that same symbol on it, the woman saying the wired and real world are the same thing.

on the way home the men in black appear again, asking lain to come with them. she asks who they are, one of them removing his glasses. he has blue eyes and tells her if she comes with them she can find out. the man from earlier blabbering about the wired in real life is saying he is on the verge of breaking the barrier between the real and wired world. he asks to be made a knight before his display shows lain. he asks who she is before lain smiles. lain is directed to Tachibana general laboratories in an apartment complex. they open a door leading in to an empty room with only a  navi, a telephone and a man in it. he asks if she can come help her get the main offices firewall to accept his navi. its a very old navi, but he got used to it so has no real interest switching. lain fixes it, the man in a way congratulating her before she hears a voice claiming her to be part of the knights. or is it the man in the streets? lain calls the man a moron he begs lain to give him a break, make him a knight. the man explains that their are idiots and pranksters on the wired, but the knights don't seem to be either. lain shakes as the man explains her significance, her presence on the wired is very unnatural. that's why the knights are interested in her. lain says she doesn't understand, but is told she has been in contact with them. she says she doesn't remember, but the man tells her the knights want her for some reason, and what ever reason for that cant be good. she asks who they are but they don't answer. the guy keeps blabbering but says something important, he isn't ready to believe in god in the wired yet, but if he is allowed to join he'll believe what ever they want him to. he is visited by the house wife and business man, before the feed cuts out.

the man tells her it doesn't matter who they are, but it matters who she is. is lain in the real world and lain in the wired the same person? are his family is family? she says they are but she has no memories of her parents birthday, parents marriage arrangement. she's never even celebrated a birthday. she doesn't know where or when she was born. lain breaks down, but eventually tells him to shut up and not waste her time. she doesn't care. he addresses her as lain of the wired. he asks if she is aware the boundary between the wired and real world is crumbling, and their interests may align. she says its interesting but tries to leave. one of the men grabs her arm and tells her she is the dangerous thing, before the man calls him Karl and he lets her leave. something interesting is about to happen but they should just watch for now.

the house wife from earlier fried the knights board, playing with her son. the man who was wandering is seen face down, his gear destroyed.

## Episode 08 
a kid plays a game in the wired and says it doesn't matter if god exists in the wired it doesn't change anything as lain talks to him, asking why he's a PKer. she investigates Tachibana, finding out they may be connected to sabotaging of the gen 7 protocol. lain goes out of her room to find her sister blabbering to herself. she finds her parents watching tv in the living room but not moving or responding to anything, just aimlessly staring. lain asks about the questions Tachibana presented, about her identity and family, in a way trying to determine the truth but brushes it off as a joke. she turns for a moment to wash a glass and when she turns back her parents stare at her, not saying anything in response.

the next day before school Alice stops lain, saying she "doesn't believe it". she asks if lain did it, but Reika claims her to be guilty and just pretending to be innocent. Alice asks if she, but then quickly dismisses the thought, saying it cant be her and she trusts lain. the others motion to a car waiting at the school gate a man driving. the girls giggle then run off after Alice that ran off before them. in class lain retreats to the wired, hearing rumours about politicians and the wired. lain says no one cares, but a man asks if she finds any of them interesting. lain thinks it to be god, but they claim they didn't create the wired so thus are not god. they simply exist everywhere in the wired, but little influence on it. they claim to be lain, a lain separate to the real lain. lain denies she ever thought they were the same thing, as she is herself. when she snaps out of it everyone stares at her, it seeming to be the teacher asked her a question. her handheld navi simply says "peeping tom". she runs out into the hall way but everyone still stares at her. she looks for Alice, wanting to know what the lain of the wired did that was so bad, why everyone is spreading rumours about her. lain of the wired sees this and smiles. lain then fucking explodes.  in an apartment the main from the car and Alice tenderly touch each other. the man is one of the teachers at the school, and asks if she is ok with doing this with a teacher. suddenly lain appears on Alice's bed, grinning at her. lain is vulgar, mimicking rumours about Alice and her affair with the teacher in a vulgar manner (like who she fingers herself to). Alice denies it but lain just laughs, Alice claiming to be deceived.

in the real world lain lays in bed being shown many images before becoming simply information. the demiurge lain appears on a bed, lain asking why it is all the parts of lain she hates. the lain just laughs as lain grabs her beck, intending to kill her. but lain cant kill her as she is lain. the people from before appear again with Lain's head, god claiming them to be her and lain omnipresent. but tis ok as the Wired's information should be shared, right? lain claims it to be a lie, she says these people are just imitation. if she really is omnipotent she should be able to delete all the memories of seeing the copies, which god challenges her to do. she then deletes them.

the next day lain goes to school, her friends having forgotten all the things the lain of the wired did. lain rejoices but then sees herself run up to them, a separate Lain. lain tries to call out to them but they cant hear her. a lain walks up to her and taunts her, saying its like she said "lain is lain and i am me"

## Episode 09 
the episode starts out by talking about [Rosswell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roswell_incident), before returning to Japan with the humming power lines. lain sits in her room in her bear onesie mirroring earlier episodes, lain is cut off from the connects she established through with the other lain manifesting. something comes to her door, resembling a little green alien man before fading away. it then discusses the [Majestic 12](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Majestic_12), saying they signed a treaty with aliens, but the presidents signature was forged. lain connects to the wired, seeing figures made of static, asking how she got everyone to forget her. they ask if she is lain, but lain asks how they know her if she has never met them? they say information doesn't always flow both ways. since the wired was created she was here, but lain repeats that isn't her. they asks how long she has been here? if a being is remembered they must exist. they argue before lain says this isn't about her, they then disappear.

the anime brings up Memex, a system in which documents can be compressed in space and accessed at a far greater speed. it was not actually created but was the basis for early Hypertext protocols which lead directly to the world wide web, a network that in essence is about sharing information and knowledge.

lain visits Cyberia, being beaconed over to the DJ that gives her a package she had apparently left. it contains a Knights circuit board. they then talk about like alien brain waves and shit. the kids ay Cyberia recognise lain approaching her,  Lain saying one of them promised to go out with her. he says she isn't the lain he wants to, but she responds there is only 1 lain, the only lain. the kid goes to her house and marvels at her navi, being practically limitless in its expansion. she tells him to sit down and presents the Knights circuit board to him. she says its him, he is one of the knights isn't he? the wired lain has only existed in the club, no where else. he only has to influence the patrons there making it easier. Taro falls over and lain starts playing music as her family listens, her parents claiming it to finally be over. Mika sits in the hallway babbling before putting her hand to her face like a telephone and acting like she is talking to someone. Taro claims it isn't him responsible. lain asks what would have happened if she had installed it, would she have gone mad and killed herself? Taro doesn't know but she puts it in his mouth, Taro telling it to be non volatile and overwrite existing memories, but he doesn't know what kind it would. with that lain takes the pressure of him, but he tells her they aren't just regularly hackers, they are trying to make the only truth a reality. she asks what that means but he says he doesn't really know since he isn't a formal member, but only that the truth is the truth  which gives it power, also making it just. he leaves, lain thanking him on the way out. he kisses her saying its a date so he had to do that.

the anime discusses [Project Xanadu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_Xanadu), claiming it to be the first digital library of its kind to access data across the globe, but didnt come to reality.

lain logs in to the wired and starts saying click and shit and computer commands in a robotic manner. she remembers the day she was introduced to her family, being basically the age she is now. her father dragged her up to her room and showed her to it. lain turns around to see herself standing in the door, saying that is her right. she asks who they are but lain says she cant know as she is lain herself, but lain says it has to be a lile. it must all be a lie.

the anime then implies that the Schumann resonance effects peoples brians and perhaps is what gives us consciousness and awaken when everyone connects together, like the neurons in the brain.

lain stares at the sky and states there is only 1 truth and 1 god and someone responds that is true, and it is him.

the anime then presents anime lore as if its real lore and presents Masami Eiri's thesis about the idea of a worldwide neural network. he proposed the network could be achieved with only our bodies and facilitated it in the 7th wired protocol. Tachibana discovering this, he was fired and his body found a week later on a train line.

lain stares down the street, seeing the man who responded, shirtless and covered in tape, resembling Eiri.
## Episode 10 
Eiri swaps body with lain, lain asking how its possible for him to be god if he's dead, Eiri responding when you die you simply abandon your body. they start saying gobbodygook but most importantly he put himself into the 7th gen wired protocol, allowing him to live forever in the wired. with this he says he is a god, but he would only be called a god if people believed in him. the knights believe in Eiri. Eiri tells her she doesn't need a body, but lain calls it out as a lie.

lain goes to school, seeing Alice and friends talk about going on a double date, lain looking in a way frightened by the idea. she finds her desk gone, as if she doesn't or was never meant to exist here. her teacher when giving hand outs simply walks past her, like she is invisible. she asked why she is real but why are people unable to see her, she made sure it wouldn't happen/ is she meant to not have a body? Alice responds, telling her she is no longer needed in the real world.

she arrives home to find her house empty, everything decayed and dead. her room is trashed, as Mika appears behind her mimicking the phone, she ahs lost her connection to the world. she begins to pick things up as her father appears behind her. her father says they are going away now, their work is done. he said she loved her, but he never enjoyed playing house. maybe he envied her, a person with a free will. she begs her father to not leave, she doesn't want to be alone, but he tells her she will never be alone in the wired.

lain enters the wired and asks who the knights actually are, they are responsible for the other lain right. they explain the knights use the collective unconscious well before the wired exists. she asks who the knights actually are, if the knights disappear than god loses his power.

at Cyberia the kids argue while Taro looks at members of the knights appear on his portable navi. a list of knights members has been posted to the wired. the corporate man is scared of the implications of this, packing a suit case as men in black appear and surround him. they shoot him with some serum gun and he collapses. his secretary finds him dead at his desk. other members seem to have spontaneously died, or killed themselves. the news report on this mass suicide and the police beginning their investigation. lain has completely fallen into the wired, the only place that will accept her. the men in black enter her room and look at her state. she asks why they did it, the men saying they were requested by their client. she leaked their identities and now they will handle the clean up. she asks why, and they tell her the wired is not allowed to become a separate thing from the real world and must remain a subsystem. they are removing Eiri from the wired and rewriting the 7th gen protocol. with that lain is also unable to enter the wired now, they don't know what she is and her powers in the wired are too strong.

lain appears in the street, Eiri appearing before her. she asks what he will do, now that all his believers are dead. he says he hasn't lost them all, he needs only 1 believer to persist. lain is that one believer. she was born in the wired, the real wired was never real but a projection. lain doesn't accept this, saying all his statements are lies. Eiri tells her the lain of the wired is the real you, but lain switches and says it doesn't matter what is real now anyway. a force permeates her and she destroys the surroundings of her.
## Episode 11
lain left with no real other option descends deeper into the wired, neglecting general cleanliness and using equipment to make her interaction with the wired  seamless. she is presented with a blur of information, in a way losing a grasp on her identity, surroundings and time reliving moments already shown. you could see this as lain reflecting on everything that's occurred, all the things she could have done to stop this. lain remembers how Chisa indicated one day walking home she has to take a different path before running off she sees all the things that lead her here, but realises that there is still one person she has, one person who cares, Alice.

lain lies down after the straining experience. Eiri appears and explains since she she connected a navi to her brain, she will overflow with al the information flowing through her. she asks if she was a machine, she tells Eiri to not call her a machine. Eiri explains its not a hardware problem, as lain is software, she is a puppet piloted by software. she walks the street telling the powerlines to be quiet. a meat blob crosses her path before Chisa emerges from behind it. Lain approaches Chisa, talking about the time they walked home together. she says he understands what she told her, but Chisa simply shakes her head. a man appears and says to remember its easy to die. Chisa says that's a lie, but the man says lain already has something that will let her. she is holding a gun. she hesitates causing the man to say its unfair since he called him here, why does she want to keep existing. lain turns to find Chisa replaced with a futuristic landscape. 

Alice is talking to Juri about rumours she is dating a teacher, saying she can introduce her to a guy to prove its lies. she hangs up but Alice gets upset, saying its not a lie. her door unlocks and she sees the little grey man alien but its actually lain. she says it wasn't her. she needs to believe her. she didn't watch her or spread rumours. Alice tells lain to not lie, she saw her. lain explains about the other lain and then suggests maybe there is another Alice too. she will never believe her so lain says she is working to make sure it didn't happen. she has destroyed the border between the wired and real world. she disappears, Alice crying scared of the situation.

Alice walks to school, meeting her friend but she is put off by it all. she says she doesn't want to go on the date today but Juri doesn't know what she's talking about, she didn't send her anything about that. they talk about the teacher, saying he's dating an 8th grader. Alice tries to say its her but they don't know what she's talking about, they have forgotten. suddenly the world fades away, lain appearing behind Alice. lain smiles in a weird way.
## Episode 12 
Summary - Alice is troubled by recent events, lain staring at her in class as she receives a message from lain saying to just rewrite bad memories, despite the fact lain had been looking at her the entire time. lain explains all the hers were different variations of hers people saw themselves, the Lain's from their internal worlds. 

a news report says protocol 7 will allow the merging of the wired and real world, before repeating the phrase "lets love lain". the men in black are having trouble dealing with their, targets, one of them saying Eiri may be pulling the strings here from within the wired. Tachibana appears and gives them their payments, telling them to get out of here, somewhere with no electrical connections. one of them asks what he plans to do using protocol 7 to connect the wired and the real word, saying something wonderful. he heaves, causing the shorter one to suddenly lose his shit and start convulsing. when the other one looks into his eyes all he can see is lain. he screams, implying he met the same fate as the other man in black.

Alice goes to Lain's house worried about her. she finds the house trashed, considering the fact lain has been in her room astral projecting the entire time anyway. she finds lain in her room, pale and covered in wires. Alice asks lain why she wiped everyone else's mind, but not hers. lain says she never intended to hurt her, she is Lain's only friend even without "connecting". lain says everyone used to be connected on an unconscious level, but she fixed that. it didn't matter which side was the real one, she existed in both. she babbles about everyone being applications and them not needing bodies before Alice places her hand on her face. she tells lain she is wrong, telling lain to focus on Alice's heart beat to make her associate with reality again. Eiri appears and starts saying shit, but only lain can see him. lain doesn't follow his instructions, causing Eiri to tell her she needs to be debugged. with that a hand appears that Alice can see. Eiri says people have an innate right to ascend higher. lain says Eiri may not have been the one to suggest his ideas, it may have come to him through god. he denies this, but lain says he wont understand since he doesn't have a body now. he goes sicko mode and forces a body into reality from things around the room. the wired isn't an upper layer of the real world, Eiri was god in the wired but who was god before the wired was created? Eiri denies this, grabbing them both Lain's navi implodes on Eiri, trapping him.
Notes - when Eiri gets a body it really does look like a false god.
## Episode 13 
lain questions who the real her is, maybe there is no real who. but then who is the one talking?

back in the scene with Eiri Alice slaps lain in a hysterical state at what she's seen.

you see scenes of lain, presumably lain but she isn't there, she doesn't exist. despite this everyone simply lives their lives in different to it, besides slight moments where they instinctually remember lain exists, but then brush it off. the only notable change is Chisa is no longer dead, being the substitute for any key experiences in their lives that lain was in. Alice states the thesis of the ending, if no one remembers things happened they didn't happen in effect. if people don't remember you you didn't exist. inadvertently people that you see had issues, the subjects of KIDs, Eiri, the knights all are unaffected or not dead.

you get the first street view in which no words are spoken, the memory and events didn't exist as lain never existed now. lain is seen in an empty street, alone. she cries but then her inner psyche begins to speak to her, saying she cant be upset at getting what she wanted. she is gone, no one dies, no one hates her, no one is hurt. they walk through scenes of people, discussing the wired and the state of humanity. people have got so far without considering such questions like what is people, what is god. lain denies this assertion if her being god, she yearns for connection and doesn't want to be alone. the other lain asks if she just wants to go back, before lain finally loses it and yells at her. she begins to shake and become static, before disappearing and asking what lain really wants to be. a voice appears and begins to talk to her, her father appearing above her. she sits at a table with her father, telling her she doesn't need to wear her bear onsie ever again. lain says she loves everyone, before bursting in to tears.

lain posits that memories aren't of just the past, maybe even the present and future. Alice, out with her boyfriend (she's been aged up to match the teacher at the school's age she was dating as a middle schooler) when she sees lain on a walk way. she runs up to her, lain only smiling. Alice smiles back, asking if they had met before. she thinks lain to be a kid from one of her classes she is teaching at. when Alice hears Lain's name, she thinks about it for a second, but determines she was just mistaken. she walks away, saying maybe they will meet again, lain responding she is right, they can see each other whenever.