## Director
[[Yuusuke Yamamoto]]
## Writer
[[Tatsuhiko Takimoto]]
## genres
#Comedy 
#Drama 
#Psychological 
#Romance 
#Slice-of-life 

# Episodes
## Episode 01 
Summary - Satou decides that his social anxiety and shut in life style is a conspiracy undertaken by the NHK (Nihon Hikkimori Kyokai or Japanese Shut-in Corporation but also a play on Nippon Hōsō Kyokai being the Japanese Broadcast Corporation but also a very close name to the NHK). one day Misaki who is handing out flyers with i guess her mum. Satou slams the door in his face, but becomes interested in her.

he decides to go out the next day to look for a job so that people won't judge him or Misaki wont think he's a weirdo, where he stumbles upon Misaki working at a manga café. she comes back later, inviting him to her project. he's initially hesitant but eventually decides to go to the park, not to meet her, just to go. Misaki eventually finds him, saying she's known about him for a long time and can help him escape his disease
Notes - so Satou basically blames the rest of the world for the fact hes a loser.

## Episode 02 
Summary - Satou refuses her agreement initially, but Misaki insists he signs the contract and brings it back the next day. why is she so insistent? Satou has more delusions, thinking he is kept alive as a test subject for some alien conspiracy. he starts debating whether he should go meet Misaki, initially against breaking free of his disease. he then thinks about what might be happening to Misaki and rushes to the park.

Misaki initially doesn't believe Satou not being a NEET, telling him to come back tomorrow night with the contract this time. Satou finally loses it and goes next door to tell Yamazaki to shut the fuck up. Yamazaki was the kid Satou saved back in high school when he got his shit kicked in. he's been going to TAFE in Tokyo and moved next door as it was a cheap apartment. he learns about Yamazaki's course and tells Misaki that he makes games. she totally doesn't believe him.

Yamazaki learns he's a college dropout and gets pissed at him, he decides his only hope is for him and Satou to make a game together. they decide to make hentai games.
Notes - they're all just goober incels.

## Episode 03
Summary - Satou gets given a bunch of porn to study in order to make their own hentai game, he ends up learning about the machinations of the porn game (that you gotta be a womanising cunt and do a little speed running). he ends up just playing porn games for multiple days straight and gets nothing done. Yamazaki comes to cut him off and remind him of his promise.

Yamazaki gets Satou back on track on making the game, instructing him to create the characters and story. he gives Satou some reference porn, which leads him for a week to download 120gb of porn until he deletes system32 to try to make more space. Yamazaki eventually snap it out of him and tells him to pull his fucking head in. he suddenly decides he needs to have photos of himself in order to motivate his self change. he ends up being a fucking weirdo and taking photos of kids, Yamazaki abandons him and Misaki finds him. she becomes disgusted by him, which makes him the ideal candidate for her project.
Notes - this anime is actually fucking insane.

## Episode 04 
Summary - Satou is having trouble in the writing of his characters. Yamazaki explains that his job is to create girls that go beyond ""realistic"" means (from the perspective of incels). he explains to Satou the stereotypical characters (childhood friend, maids, robots). Satou starts seeing parallels between the girls he's meant to be writing and Misaki.

Satou remembers his past with Hitomi, and laments that if it was a game he could play that part over until he got it right. Yamazaki blackmails Satou to go to Akihabara, as he says he has no reference points for his girls. they obviously go to a maid café and a weeb shop. Satou ends up buying a figure and falls in the weeb hole. he comes up with the most fucking dogshit idea ever by just smashing a bunch of tropes together.

Satou starts pondering the orb, when Hitomi recognises him.
Notes - a lull tbh.

## Episode 05
Summary - Satou remembers the last time Hitomi saw him, Hitomi coming onto him. they discuss their lives since they last saw each other, Hitomi working for the government and being on mad medication. Satou explains his state and how he believes his life to be a conspiracy. Hitomi remembers how Satou talked about all his friends, but they never seemed to meet him. in the end, she asks Satou if they can meet again.

worried about how he currently is, he starts thinking about what if Misaki really can help him, then he can see Hitomi. like a guardian angel that he mentioned in the previous ep at the start, Misaki arrives when Satou sits in the park, not even with a plan that they would meet. he gives her the signed contract. she tells him to come back tomorrow to begin his reformation.

Satou is going to apologise to Yamazaki about quitting the development of the hentai game, but Yamazaki gets into an argument with his parents, his parents seeming to be dissatisfied in what Yamazaki is doing with his life. the next day the first counselling session, Misaki saying he should just get Christ pilled and do some Freudian analysis. despite that she spouts bullshit, it makes Satou realise he isn't a shut-in if he works toward something. he gives Yamazaki a rough scenario draft and tells him he doesn't want to quit, and they should take their time with the game.

Notes - irony that the conspiracy believer works for the government

## Episode 06 
Summary - Satou has trouble writing the scenario still, but atleast is writing shit. Misaki tells him to think everyone is stupid and look down on them (which mayhaps she does this). she tells Satou that Yamazaki has a girlfriend, which sounds like a pretty ideal girl to Yamazaki. Satou sets out to figure out if Yamazaki is a liar.

Satou follows Yamazaki the next day to spy on him. he ends up sitting in on a game scenario writing class, writing a fairly compelling scenario. he hides it from the teacher initially, but the teacher tells him its pretty good. he says that he thinks the teacher is looking down on him, the teacher telling him maybe he just pushes people away and focuses on perfection and he thinks people judge him for needing help. Satou has a nervous episode where he thinks everyone is judging him, even tho that isn't his intention to judge others.

Satou runs out the class, overhearing Yamazaki talking to his girlfriend. he realises that Satou actually doesn't have a girlfriend, her just playing him and not taking it seriously. Yamazaki is oblivious but.

he meets Misaki that night and tells her about his findings, Misaki congratulating Satou on going outside. it turns out she probably planned Satou doing this, goading him into going outside.

Notes - cringe compilation episode

## Episode 07
Summary - Satou fantasizes about going to school and how he would get made fun of as everyone is an agent of the NHK. satou wakes up sick, Yamazaki bring him supplies. the incident at Yamazaki's school made him descend further into shutting himself off from the world, his sickness being a ploy to get rid of Yamazaki.

he gets a phone call from his mum telling him that she's coming to Tokyo. he makes up that he got a job and found a girl to appease his mum, but she is happy for him, which makes him agitated that she has such little faith that she was happy for him. Misaki calls him and is concerned that he hasn't been showing up. they meet up and he explains the situation to her. she offers to pretend to be his girlfriend but he goes on a tangent of getting Yamazaki to do it.

he and Yamazaki decide to make a company. they end up making wacky shit but that doesn't solve the girlfriend problem. he calls Hitomi but she is busy, probably fucking a company exec. eventually Misaki gets through to him and tells him she can pretend to be his girlfriend.

they go on a practice date and do wacky shit like go to the movies and shit. Satou kinda gets flustered. Misaki lets on to knowing a little bit too much about Satou, but says its because he told her a long time ago. she makes up some story when pressed to tell him about herself.

## Episode 08 
Summary - Misaki gets ready to meet Satou's mum. Satou missed the fax and is still spending his time at home trying to clean up. Misaki comes to his house and helps him clean up. wacky sexual hijinks ensue and Satou becomes kinda a sex pest. his mum arrives midway through cleaning. she says some very similar shit to Misaki, implying that mayhaps Satou has an Oedipus complex or some shit. Misaki meets his mum, being very shy unlike her usual boisterous self.

the three of them go down to Chinatown. his mum starts basically interrogating them and trying to find cracks in the lie. Satou calls Yamazaki to prepare him for if Satou's mum calls. meanwhile his mum figures out the ruse, but Misaki keeps trying to deny it. Satou overhears the conversation. Misaki begins opening up about her life, but Satou remembers that he used to never fess up to things, but she always had his back. Satou feels a great sense of indenture to his mum and doesn't want to lie to her. Satou is about to tell his mum about the lie, but she says she needs to go see her friends and rushes off.

Satou tries to leave since they don't need to keep up the lie, but Misaki insists they go for a walk together. she tells Satou he's lucky for having a mum like he does, and that she feels like a failure since she can't be normal. Satou ends up nearly kissing Misaki, before Yamazaki calls to chew Satou out.

## Episode 09 
Summary - Yamazaki gets turned down hanging out, remembering some thing from his childhood. Satou and Misaki are in the park again, Satou not really paying attention. they share a moment, but Misaki runs before anything can happen. Satou doesn't trust Misaki, thinking she might be an agent for the NHK but still fantasizes about her, before Yamazaki barges in drunk, insisting they go to the beach. Satou tries to get out of it, saying he doesn't have trunks, but Yamazaki means go to Comiket.

he says his friend sold a game at Comiket, Yamazaki actually gassing Satou up and making it so they have to have the game done by Comiket, which is in about a month. Satou tells him to fuck off but Yamazaki tells him to stop jerking off and get some shit done. they buckle down until Satou gets burnt out and asks if they should go see the fireworks, but Yamazaki says its a waste of time, nothing good comes from them. Yamazaki remembers when he saw fireworks with his family, and his crush with another boy.

Yamazaki finishes the designs, making Satou fantasize over nutting on the main heroine, before it turns into Misaki. this happens with every design he looks at, causing Satou to get really pissed off. Yamazaki starts wise treeing about real life romance but then starts saying the most incel shit ever, decrying the fall of the east and rise of capitalism. Satou feels through the bullshit, realising that Nanako is the model for the heroine in the game.

Yamazaki suddenly gets serious, saying he was gonna make a mistake again. back in grade school he was getting bullied until a girl helped chase off the bullies. he invites her to see the fireworks, but she says she has to go see her grandpa in the hospital. later he saw her at the fireworks with another guy, realising that she was there and starting his incel grindset thinking women are all thots. he put a Kamen rider mask on and started saying "begone evil doers". 

Yamazaki got a call from Nanako, inviting him out to go to the fireworks, very quickly changing his tune and being very cheerful and a cuck. suddenly he is very content to go see fireworks and leaves Satou to work on the script. Satou just goes back to his room and curses Yamazaki, waiting for his counselling session with Misaki. he hears tapping on his window, Misaki throwing rocks at his window.  she cancels the counselling session, but invites him to go see the fireworks with her.

Notes - mf is scared of the mother archetype and as at mental warfare with his shadow. its funny the hero in the eroge is like a combo of Yamazaki and Satou in le head.

## Episode 10 
Summary - Satou starts fretting over bitches instead of writing. Yamazaki is going out on a date so asks to have the script sent to him, finding that Satou had written Misaki's name where the heroine's name should be. Satou goes to his room and basically just waits to go see Misaki, fretting over even coming early. he finds Misaki caring for a cat, once the session starts not wanting her to leave. Satou goes home and starts fantasizing about marrying Misaki, but starts freaking out about her friends and family, realising he doesn't really know anything about her.

Yamazaki starts bashing on his door drunk, saying they need to keep working. Satou is concerned if something happened on his date, Yamazaki getting mad and saying his theory was proven correct. Nanako was with some guy when he met her and i guess he just ran off without running off, saying you cant trust these thots. Satou starts seriously considering why she knows so much about him but he doesn't know anything about her, is she a stalker or something. he has a dream that Misaki is an agent of the NHK and is just trying to trap him into staying a hikikimori forever. the next day Yamazaki is obviously hung over but wants to work on the game, but Satou makes them go for a walk. they go to watch Misaki's work, but don't go inside. 

eventually Misaki leaves and they start tailing her. they follow her to a big house, overlooking the park where they meet. it also has a view of their apartments, meaning she has been watching them the entire time. she picks up her aunt and they go to a meeting with the solicitation group that she was first introduced with. Satou decides that they must be some cult, but she still wants to see her. the appliances start talking to her, saying if it doesn't work out he'll never talk to a woman ever again and it must be a plan of the NHK. Satou considers this, there is a chance she could actually still harbour ill intentions for him and he could get hurt. he goes to visit Misaki, saying that he needs to stop seeing her, he doesn't want to see her before running away like an actual little piss baby.

Notes - bro runs like he thinks he's so dramatic and the main character, but she knows where you live

## Episode 11
Summary - it raining, Misaki is talking to a doll asking why things went wrong with Satou. meanwhile Satou is working on the script. Yamazaki tells him to just send him the script for what he has and they will make a trail version. Yamazaki projects that its Satou's fault even tho he would come home drunk multiple times. despite this, they have actually reached a landmark, so share a toast together. Hitomi and her fiancé share a toast over dinner, it most likely being the little them they spend together busy at work. Hitomi goes home, having a shower and taking her meds. she goes to her computer and goes to a suicide forum, making a post making up a story that she hadn't been eating with her well doing fiancé but a volent drunkard boyfriend in the form of Satou. meanwhile Satou and Yamazaki prep for the game launch by making box art.

Hitomi at work is reprimanded for proposing a costly project proposal, telling to destroy it. some office workers call her a bitch and celebrate her getting put in her place, as some fate nerd emoji tries to hit on her. she gets a message from Akira saying he cant make their trip and he'll make it up to her, as a NHK gremlin laughs at her. she calls him and says its fine but she just wont go, as she takes her medication again. she sees gremlins laughing at her, saying it to be a conspiracy against her. she returns home to the forum, printing out details to an offline meeting they are having.

the duo finish the prep, Yamazaki telling Satou to not sleep in but giving him a copy of the game. he imagines having a conversation with Hitomi, dressed in a trench coat as she starts talking about the globalists and global warming being cause of the jews. he's snapped out when he gets a phone call, a call from Hitomi. he answers, saying she's coming over for a drink. she's already drunk when she gets there. they start basically doing what they did in high school but drunk. Satou doesn't remember Hitomi ever being so happy, besides at their cultural festival. she had just broken up with her boyfriend, but its ok cause she just thinks its dead weight. but she still breaks down in tears, not able to hide her discontent. Satou realises that was his shot and he blew it, but rn might be his next shot, just needing to wait for her to cry, but Hitomi just starts eepin.

you get some mutli-level symbolism of Hitomi saying she is here to say goodbye (as in die) but also goodbye as she finishes school. Satou remembers she said something about a summer vacation, taking that as his chance with her. he writes Yamazaki an apology about how he cant make it to Comiket, going back to his apartment to look after Hitomi. Hitomi mistakes Satou's optimism as actually wanting to kill himself when he just wants to go on vacay with her. she breaks down and thanks him for being with her in her dying times. Misaki gets out of bed and sees Hitomi and Satou leaving, racing after them to find out where Satou is going. she trips over and eats shit as Hitomi speeds off.
Notes - 

## Episode 12 
Summary - Hitomi and Satou pick up some shit, Satou trying to keep Hitomi happy so he gets his shit. they arrive at the train station, Satou noticing some gloomy guys who turn out to be members of the forum. Hitomi lies about Satou being her boyfriend, Satou being generally bewildered by the whole situation. on the train Hitomi calls Akira, most likely intending to tell him he wont ever see her again but he misses the call. they arrive at their destination and board a boat, it seeming that the guys are kinda getting cold feet about group suicide, but Satou unknowingly eggs them on, say its something they have got to do. Hitomi throws her phone into the ocean, saying she doesn't need it anymore.

meanwhile Akira knocks off work early and keeps trying to contact Hitomi. he visits her apartment, bring snacks and drinks and looking for her. he finds the book she is currently reading *the Love Suicides at Sonezaki*, trying to call her again but being told the line is disconnected. he contacts the hotel finding that she had cancelled the reservation, yet isn't at home. he looks out the window, wondering where his fiancé is. on the boat one of the guys is reading a book about drug side effects as they arrive at the island. Satou feels liberated on the island, being openly happy about the affair despite how glum everyone else is.

Akira finds Hitomi's blog post, finding out she visited Satou and finding his address, most likely going to visit him to see if he can find anything out. Satou asks Hitomi if she will go swimming, but she shrugs him off. Satou wonders why everyone is so downer, keeping to themselves. he tries to interact with them but they generally just aren't having it. Satou says he feels more alone here than he ever has before. with that he realised that he as a highschooler was alone because he never let himself not be, staying out relationships and connections.

meanwhile Misaki goes to Satou's apartment and finds Yamazaki banging on Satou's door. she asks if Yamazaki knows where Satou is, but Yamazaki blows her off saying she must be mistaken, Satou wouldn't do that. well besides if it was Hitomi as Akira also shows up, asking to be let in on the situation too. Satou begins to make a fire, despite getting told there is no point to it. he rubs his hand raw trying to get a tree trunk out of the sand, slowly people coming to help him. Satou is final clued into the reason they are on the island, in order to kill themselves.

## Episode 13 
Summary - Yamazaki reads Satou's letter, making it sound like he's gonna neck himself. Akira apologises for letting Satou get involved. he states that they are only going to do it tonight, so as long as they get there before then they can save them. the group use the last of their fuel on the fire, meaning they cant make it back to the mainland. Yamazaki explains why Satou might consider suicide, but also confronts Misaki about how she has been spying on them. he asks why she would do all that, he was obviously a dropout loser, why did she help him. she just wanted to help him get better, but he's like a stray dog, if you feed him you need to keep looking after him.

the group lament their past, before Hitomi steps up ranting about her conspiracy that the world is out to get her, and wont let her be at peace. the only way they get out of it is to die, do something outside the ordinary. Akira finds out where they are, renting a boat and getting directions to go find them. Yamazaki asks Misaki what she is going to do now, considering what she's done she probably would want this. she denies it, saying she needs Satou, she has been looking for someone like him all her life. they set out for the island, determined to save them. the group put out the fire, deciding its time to do it, and start walking up the cliffs of the island to the mansion on the island. 

like the original owner, they intend to throw himself off a cliff into the ocean. the youngest member asks what happens if they don't die, but the leader denies it ever being possible to live. everyone thanks Satou for helping them live a good final day. the trio approach the island as the group prepare to jump holding hands on the cliff face. they are about to jump when the med student breaks down, he keeps saying his mothers face. he really did want to die, but kept thinking of the people he was leaving behind. they all have family, people that care. the leader says he used to, but not now, being left by his family when his company goes under. but just because he has no one doesn't mean he should drag everyone down with him. the high school student says he cant go back, he stole from his family to pay off yakuza, but the leader tells him they can get a good lawyer, free of charge.

it seems like everyone is gonna be ok, but Hitomi is steadfast. she isn't going home. she is determined that no one needs her, Akira is so fucking perfect she is just dead weight. she grabs Satou's hand and makes for the cliff, as Akira starts yelling to tell her to not do it. he asks her to get married, he cant live without her. with that Satou realises he had no shot and is just gonna jump, considering this was his shot out of the NHK. Akira tries to talk him out of it, but Satou isn't having it till Misaki starts speaking to him, telling him is worth more than some object, he's a failure but still a person. he's the only person more worthless than her. Satou gets more driven to jump, but Yamazaki tells him Satou isn't meant to die like this, he's just gonna die quietly. with that Satou decides its ok but slips before being pulled back up by the group.
Notes - bro

## Episode 14 
Summary - the group clean up the mess they had made before deciding to jump, realising the number of options they had had before death. Misaki jokes about Satou not dying, but when Satou raises his hand she instinctually seizes up and starts trembling. Satou is generally a cunt and focuses on himself more than you know the girl he likes that he's obviously just scared the shit out of. Akira and Hitomi go to get fuel for the boat as the other's wait on the other boat, but Satou is generally pissed off, not wanting to have any of it. they arrive back to land and are met some guy from a hotel. Akira had booked a hotel retreat for them all before they went to save the group, Misaki refuses to go with them, staying back at the dock. the group relax in the hot springs before getting chewed out by janitor for even thinking about dying, what about the people around them. they were going to cause trouble for the marina staff, the police, nearly everyone.

the family members of the group arrive, asking why they would even think about it, but they all say its their fault they went to the island. the kid gives Satou a free trial for FFXI, saying he'll see him in the game. Hirohito is called by his family, and despite the fact they probably wont see each other again, he tells Satou to take care. Satou asks where Yamazaki and Misaki are, being told they are at Comiket and home probably. Akira tells Satou they should meet up some time, and Hitomi apologises for getting Satou involved, but Satou says to not worry about it, just stay happy. the leader's son arrives, saying his family had heard what had happened and that maybe they should try again being a family.

Satou gets the train home alone. he looks up at Misaki's house, before heading home and finding a letter from Misaki. he thinks about what Misaki said, that he was worthless and the only person worse than her, so he cant die now. Yamazaki comes back drunk, telling Satou its his fault they sold no copies, but Satou cant stop thinking about Misaki. her letter said she would be there at the normal time, so Satou just fucking leaves Yamazaki in his apartment. he goes to the park, finding Misaki generally shut off. she shows him the contract and says since he didn't come to counselling for a few days, he should be fined, but since she withheld her house from him, she will let it slide this time. Satou gets mad and snatches the contract from her, but calms down when he sees her tear up, realising this probably means a lot to her.

satou arrives home to a call from his mum, saying there is something she needs to speak to him about. she tries to tell Satou something, but keeps cutting out before she says she is going to have to cut his allowance.
in half.

Notes - despite that shut ins think the world is against them, people that barely know each other can have profound effects on people's lives.

## Episode 15
Summary - Satou is in despair at the news. he decides he cant really do much jobs considering he is a shut in. he remembers how he can do RuneScape gold farming. he signs in to the game and gets freaked out by the number of people in the main hub. he gets fucked up before Yamazaki teaches him how to make parties but he doesn't really listen. he goes to counselling and Misaki tells him the like eat elephant 1 bite at a time, fuelling him even more. he forms the gooner den and just starts grinding in game, blowing off misaki. eventually Misaki comes to look for Satou and finds him like actual the worst state he's been in so far
Notes - kinda be just shit happening with not much bearing

## Episode 16 
Summary - Misaki tries to snap Satou out by wearing cat ears but he's too deep in. his final fantasy online kitten gets a party for them and they go to slay a dragon, succeeding but a midget tells him it isn't that easy to make money. he starts making fun of Satou while literally being a shut in as the kid's sister overhears Satou's name, finding an old year book with Satou in it. Satou falls deeper into the game, rejecting the outside world. he asks Mia his kitten if she will stay with him forever, but she says along as they can meet up irl. she appears at his apartment and exposes him in 4k. Mia was actually Yamazaki trying to show Satou the dangers of online games. he hasn't made any money and his free trial period lapsed ages ago. he should quit and come back to Yamazaki to finish their eroge, but Satou loses it, scarred by the experience and lost as to what he's going to do.

he gets a call from Kobayashi, the class pres. from his graduating year. Misaki goes to try to get Satou out his funk but finds his apartment empty

## Episode 17
Summary - Satou goes out and meets Kobayashi, finding she looks completely different. they hash out their prior drama, Kobayashi thinking Satou to be condescending and Satou find Kobayashi uptight. she asks what Satou is doing now and he has to admit he's a shut in. Misaki waits for Satou to come back, Yamazaki telling her he will come back eventually. she worries if what if his foot slips off the cliff, he suddenly falls suddenly and needs help. Kobayashi takes Satou to her mentor, a successful businessman. she notes that Satou cant be that bad if he can get on a train, Misaki having had an effect on him in the past 6 months but he denies this.

they arrive, but Satou is put off by the fact they are in the boondocks, he has the super car but a run down house. it seems fishy, there being many signs that shit is sus until he goes upstairs and finds it to be pretty culty. they start clapping when commanded and force Satou to also. they shill their energy drink to the people gathered. Sagawa eventually comes out and he's just some old man with gold and shit. Satou slinks out but finds yakuza types outside. Kobayashi finds him and the MLM scheme gets outed, Satou just being an easy mark. he jumps out a window to get out and runs. Kobayashi chases him, saying she got conned first and just wants an out. she doesn't want to get tricked anymore. her last job conned her after all her work and mouse road took her in but just fucked her more. she plays on Satou's paranoia by saying everyone looks down on him. they need to rise up and show them they aren't failures by rising up through the MLM.
Satou gets talked into it.

Misaki waits for Satou as Yamazaki tells her to not wait for him. Satou comes back with all his shit, having taken out debt to buy it. Yamazaki immediately sees what Satou has fallen into, Satou immediately dropping the positive tone.

## Episode 18 
Summary - Yamazaki just clowns on Satou, but Misaki immediately goes to a book store and buys a book to help Satou. Yamazaki tells Satou to return the stuff but Satou thinks it would be embarrassing. he blames his shut in illness for not being able to go out suddenly, but Misaki runs in and says she can help holding a book about MLMs. the next day Satou invites Kobayashi to a café with some plan. on the train Satou gets paranoid about everyone judging him, despite the fact no one probably cares. he starts having a panic attack only supported by Misaki and Yamazaki. Yamazaki gets angry at Satou for his lack of conviction and only want to go with the motions, his debt wont just disappear. they get to the café and confront Kobayashi. meanwhile Kobayashi's brother goes off at a guy for ""undervaluing"" his product.

Kobayashi looks serious but then says its fine to let Satou out. but she then asks Satou if he eats correctly, and tries to tell him he's a shut in because of his poor eating habits. she starts talking shit and saying big words (also says don't use gas use charcoal which like, guess what the MLM also sells???). she suckers them in to buying more shitty diet supplements. they realise they are suckers and formulate a new plan. they call Kurokawa Kobayashi's rival for her address. they go to her house and chase her inside to make sure they get rid of their shit. they find her house full of shit. Kobayashi is so deep she needs to sell everything otherwise she'll never recovered. her brother starts beating on the ceiling, causing Misaki to go and investigate. they find him stomping on the ground, breaking down as they enter.

## Episode 19
Summary - Kobayashi hears the commotion and tells everyone to leave immediately. they step outside as Kobayashi closes the door and her brother proceeds to beat her, telling her to not let people into the house. she explains she fell in try to cure her brother's condition and fell behind as his condition grew worse. she explains that he did go to university but dropped out and simply stayed home playing games. her father died, forcing her to work since her brother couldn't, falling in to mouse road trying to help her and her brother. she tells them to leave so she can find the next sucker. Yamazaki tells Satou they should leave, they did what they could but Satou is conflicted, obviously caring for Kobayashi. as they are about to leave Kobayashi begs Satou to go speak to her brother, but online not in person.

he logs in and finds him alone. he asks if RMT is working for him, Satou saying he had quit. he chastises him for quitting so early, but Satou tells him he is delusional if he thinks he's going to make any money on RMT. he doesn't listen, causing Satou to enraged and lose his shit for being so selfish and not thinking about his sister. he just wants to escape reality. but Satou also does, he has read 200 self help books and knows how to fix his life, but he doesn't want to. he's scared, scared of what happens after he changes. he knows he needs to, but he doesn't want to face that and hopes at one point things will just change if he keeps going the way he is. he tells Satou to turn back, log out and don't ever log back in. they leave, Kobayashi's brother breaking down.

Yamazaki and Satou keep working on the game, Yamazaki making post game content. he loses it as Satou for not having written anything in the 4 weeks since the MLM incident. Misaki comes by and feeds Satou. she reprimands him for talking back when the only reason he hasn't starved is because she feeds him. meanwhile Mouse road collapses, being raided by police. Kobayashi gets nabbed, leaving her brother alone and starving. she eventually returns home, most likely cleared of masterminding anything and being a victim, finding her brother gone. meanwhile Satou argues with Yamazaki about the game when Kobayashi calls him. she asks them to help her find her brother. she goes and has a bath, being worn down by it all. meanwhile her brother rides past, having got a job doing food delivery in exchange for food.
Notes - 

## Episode 20 
Summary - Satou and Yamazaki are in the home stretch of finishing the game, as long as nothing bad happens. so Yamazaki is called back to his home town when his father is hospitalised. Satou continues to work on the script as Yamazaki goes, but struggles to made the amendments Yamazaki wants him to. he begins to miss Yamazaki. he just goes through the motions and gets barely anything done. he starts thinking about the futility of life, human life is a blip in the history of everything. Yamazaki returns, bring back local delicacies. he is still dower, explaining his parents run a farm and he is in vocational school fist year at 21 only because he had went to university for animal husbandry, so he could inherit the business. but when his aunt offers his parents insurance for him, he finds his entire life planned out for him.

22: graduate
25: marry
27: first child
29: second child
50: first child graduates college
65: retire
80: die

it scared him not even being 20, so quit uni and moved here after a year of work. but he cant continue, his dad will make it through but they need him back on the farm. if their game succeeds he might be able to continue, but if not he needs to go back. so they are going to have to work their asses off.

they end up getting drunk and burning Yamazaki's textbooks since he doesn't need them anymore. he calls Nanako and invites her to his house, trying to get a reaction from her. they film her as she arrives, having covered up all his shit, but she asks him about his dad and if he's ok. he reassures her but is just a cunt and keeps doing his exposing the gooner den and how he modelled a character after her. but she basically professes her love for him and how he's weird but dedicated. but Yamazaki blows it when he keeps the gag going, causing Nanako to punch him and leave him. he actually was trying to push her away, he is going to have to break it off anyway, he's going to have to leave in a month.
Notes - 

## Episode 21 
Summary - Satou and Yamazaki finish their game, but no one really buys it. they sell 5 copies. Yamazaki doesn't want to give it to class mates so he kinda just leaves Satou with the games. Yamazaki gives Satou his pururin plushie and some other shit. Satou helps Yamazaki pack to head home, with wacky hijinks. the two of them are kinda just dorkuses until Yamazaki loses it about the whole situation, Yamazaki wishing it didn't have to be this way. Yamazaki laments how he wishes his life could be like a story, atleast they get endings unlike living in constant uncertainty.

the next day Yamazaki leaves. Satou realises there game was pretty shit, and how quiet it is. too quiet. Satou starts to think he's the only person left on earth. no the universe. he is god and should use his powers to call Yamazaki back, but eventually snaps out of his stupor. he realises he's aimless now, with no real idea what he is going to do. Misaki informs Satou he is to have an exam tomorrow, to round out his program for the year. he is to go to a shrine, as the crowd would be too much for a shut in. on the way Misaki loses Satou, Satou starting to freak out before Hitomi appears.

## Episode 22 
Summary - Satou and Hitomi hang out while Misaki looks for Satou. eventually they go to a hotel and Hitomi asks Satou if they should fuck but its all in le Satou head. he tells her they should just go home. they link arms as Misaki finds them, distraught at the idea of Satou being with Hitomi. she says they should meet again in 10 years, when their lives have settled down. they wave good bye, Satou not even sure he'll see her ever again. he finds Misaki dejected, saying they don't need to go to the shrine anymore. they head home and Misaki says the results are invalid before running off home, heading to her room and simply staring at the ceiling. she see's memories of lava, her drunkard father and mother with bottles of alcohol.

the next day Misaki goes to Satou to give food, as he needs her to feed him, but Yamazaki says he will send Satou cheese since they have so much. Misaki gets upset and takes his food with her as she runs off saying god is not a good person. later they find the cat in the park died, burying it with a headstone. Misaki says god must be evil, for only bad things to happen, so she is going to kill god, to prove he exists, so that it isn't all her fault for the things wrong in her life and past. she goes home and writes in her diary that the plan is successful; Satou is her captive.
## Episode 23
Summary - Misaki mutters to herself as Satou arrives, starting a lecture on the last words of famous people. he only gets Osamu Dazai's final words right. Satou asks if Misaki is from here, saying she isn't but from a small town where a famous person killed themself. you see what is presumed to be Misaki's mother kill herself by jumping from a cliff. Misaki says they will have a final exam, a graduation exam as Misaki is going away, to a town no one knows about. the exam goes off without a hitch Satou being fine. Misaki congratulates Satou for his reformation, but Satou asks why him, Misaki saying he was the only person more worthless than her. she presents him with a new contract that stipulates he is to stay with her forever, so that they can both feel better about their lives. Satou says he cant sign it, no contract can guarantee what it says. a cute girl like him doesn't need someone like him. she begs him, she doesn't want to be alone, Satou internalising this saying he doesn't want to be alone but refusing to stay. of course he's lonely, but he doesn't feel worthy of saving Misaki, but also that he just feels he's a loser.

Satou dreams Misaki repeatedly taunting him. he is told his living allowance is being cut off and Yamazaki doesn't send him food. he goes days without eating (like Kobayashi's brother before he got better). he looks back on when Misaki used to feed him. Satou is forced into doing manual labour and living ultimately a lonely and unfulfilled life, but he eventually recovers. Misaki falls deeper into depression, realising Satou didn't need her. he sees an ambulance go up to Misaki's house, Misaki being taken to hospital, having collapsed in the bathroom. Satou begins to visit her house frequently, Misaki's uncle sees him, also being Satou's land lord. he explains Misaki's situation, having slipped in the shower but generally having a sad life so far. her father died soon after her birth, her mother remarrying. her step father was abusive and a drunkard, leading Misaki's mother to kill herself. she was left with her step father, who didn't care about her or want her. she is socially inept and dropped out of school, feeling she is generally a burden. he asks Satou to just keep being her friend, so she atleast has someone. they arrive at the hospital and find Misaki gone. Satou finds a note from her, saying good bye to everyone. Misaki is planning to kill herself. Satou races to an ATM, taking money out to chase her to her home town.
Notes - oh, misaki was light headed cause she cut herself.

## Episode 24 
Summary - Satou arrives, contemplating if he even has a right to stop Misaki. he approaches the cape, seeing the anti-suicide signs that dot the trail up. as he approaches there is no sight of Misaki, Satou thinking she may have already jumped. he rationalises he couldn't have he rushed here, he tries lighting a cigarette but gets pissed off when he cant. Misaki actually was quietly sitting on a bench, watching Satou. Satou is his usual self and gets pissed off she did all this, wasting his money. but Misaki responds she should have just done it properly last night and not been rushed to hospital. she blames her self for her parents death, and thinks her uncle doesn't want her, her causing her aunt and uncle to argue. she just wanted a connection, someone who needed her, that thought she wasn't a burden. she sits on the railing, on the edge of jumping. Satou begs her, saying he does need her, he loves her but she denies it. she came to die.

Satou contemplates why dying is bad, life is suffering and all you have to look forward to is more suffering, so what's the point. but despite that, you cant, you have to struggle in case it isn't. Misaki simply says goodbye, as she jumps, but Satou pulls her back up. Satou says its not Misaki's fault for anything, she isn't a burden. Satou doesn't want to be angry anymore, he wants to look after her. he rationalises that most conspiracies aren't true, but some are. he must have been right, the NHK is real, and are targeting him and Misaki. everyone has their NHK, Satou's Nihon Hikikomori Kyokai, forcing him into being a shut in, Hitomi's Nihon Hiyowa Kyokai, forcing Hitomi's weak heart and mind into suicide, or the Nihon Hikan Kyokai forcing Misaki to be pessimistic. if you don't like the sound of that you can call them what ever you want, even God. Satou starts just pointing at the horizon, forcing Misaki to also. suddenly Misaki starts seeing some ghost cunt and Satou goes to fight it. he deluded runs towards the cliff, telling Misaki to live on for him. he thinks somehow killing himself will help Misaki, so jumps, but is caught by a suicide net, not letting him have his dramatic death. Misaki starts sobbing Satou having not died. Satou climes back up and Misaki drags him away from the cliff face and starts hitting him for thinking something so stupid. Satou posits it will take them till morning to walk back to the station, so Misaki takes them to her old house. they sit there and satou talks about the psychoanalysis sexual dream to tease her, before talking about his childhood with her.

flash forward to spring, Satou gets a letter from Yamazaki informing him of his marriage, Hitomi of her child being born. Satou leaves his apartment, having moved and going to work. he goes to the park after work, meeting Misaki. he's teaching her high school subjects, having only dropped out of college not high school. Mita house is being remodelled. Misaki tells Satou she figured out her NHK, Nihon Hitojichi Koukan-kai (Japan Hostage Exchanging Meeting). if one of them dies then the other does, its a stalemate. they may not have solved their problems, they still feel bad and arent really any better, but they atleast have each other, something to struggle for.
Notes - 
# General notes
actual favourite anime.
